
A
BILL
TO
Make provision for the regulation of the processing of information relating
to identified or identifiable living individuals; to make provision about services
consisting of the use of information to ascertain and verify facts about
individuals; to make provision about access to customer data and business
data; to make provision about privacy and electronic communications; to make
provision about services for the provision of electronic signatures, electronic
seals and other trust services; to make provision about the disclosure of
information to improve public service delivery; to make provision for the
implementation of agreements on sharing information for law enforcement
purposes; to make provision about the keeping and maintenance of registers
of births and deaths; to make provision about information standards for health
and social care; to establish the Information Commission; to make provision
about oversight of biometric data; and for connected purposes.
B E IT ENACTED by the King’s most Excellent Majesty, by and with the advice and
consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons, in this present
Parliament assembled, and by the authority of the same, as follows:—
PART 1
DATA PROTECTION
Definitions
1 Information relating to an identifiable living individual
(1) In section 3 of the Data Protection Act 2018 (referred to in this Act as “the 5
2018 Act”) (terms relating to the processing of personal data)—
(a) in subsection (3) (definition of “identifiable living individual”), after
paragraph (b) insert—
10
“(and see section 3A for provision about when information relates to
an identifiable living individual).”, and
Bill 265 58/3
Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill 1
Part 1—Data protection 
(b) after that subsection insert—
“(3A) An individual is identifiable from information “directly” if the
individual can be identified without the use of additional
information.
(3B) An individual is identifiable from information “indirectly” if 5
the individual can be identified only with the use of additional
information.”
(2) In the 2018 Act, after section 3 insert—
“3A Information relating to an identifiable living individual
(1) For the purposes of this Act, information being processed is 10
information relating to an identifiable living individual only in cases
described in subsections (2) and (3).
(2) The first case is where the living individual is identifiable (as described
15
in section 3(3)) by the controller or processor by reasonable means at
the time of the processing.
(3) The second case is where the controller or processor knows, or ought
reasonably to know, that—
(a) another person will, or is likely to, obtain the information as
a result of the processing, and
(b) the living individual will be, or is likely to be, identifiable (as 20
described in section 3(3)) by that person by reasonable means
at the time of the processing.
(4) The reference in subsection (3)(a) to obtaining the information as a
25
result of the processing includes obtaining the information as a result
of the controller or processor carrying out the processing without
implementing appropriate technical and organisational measures to
mitigate the risk of the information being obtained by persons with
whom the controller or processor does not intend to share the
information.
(5) For the purposes of this section, an individual is identifiable by a 30
person “by reasonable means” if the individual is identifiable by the
person by any means that the person is reasonably likely to use.
(6) For the purposes of subsection (5), whether a person is reasonably
35
likely to use a means of identifying an individual is to be determined
taking into account, among other things—
(a) the time, effort and costs involved in identifying the individual
by that means, and
(b) the technology and other resources available to the person.”
(3) In Article 4 of the UK GDPR (definitions)—
(a) the existing text becomes paragraph 1, 40
(b) in paragraph 1(1) (definition of “personal data”)—
2 Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill
Part 1—Data protection 
(i) for “identifiable natural person”, in both places it appears,
substitute “identifiable living individual”,
(ii) for “that natural person” substitute “the individual”, and
(iii) at the end insert “(and see paragraph 2)”,
(c) in paragraph 1, after point (1) insert— 5
“(1A) an individual is identifiable from information “directly” if the
individual can be identified without the use of additional
information;
(1B)
10
an individual is identifiable from information “indirectly” if
the individual can be identified only with the use of additional
information;”,
(d) in paragraph 1, for point (5) substitute—
“(5) “pseudonymisation” means the processing of personal
15
data in such a manner that it becomes information
relating to a living individual who is only indirectly
identifiable; but personal data is only pseudonymised if
the additional information needed to identify the
individual is kept separately and is subject to technical
20
and organisational measures to ensure that the personal
data is not information relating to an identified or directly
identifiable living individual;”, and
(e) at the end insert—
“2 Section 3A of the 2018 Act (information relating to an
25
identifiable living individual) applies for the purposes of this
Regulation as it applies for the purposes of that Act (and, as
so applied, the references in that section to section 3(3) of that
Act are to be read as references to Article 4(1)(1) of this
Regulation).”
(4)
30
In consequence of the amendment made by subsection (3)(a), in section 6 of
the 2018 Act (meaning of “controller”), for “4(7)” substitute “4(1)(7)”.
2 Meaning of research and statistical purposes
In Article 4 of the UK GDPR (definitions), after paragraph 2 (inserted by
section 1 of this Act) insert—
“3.
35
References in this Regulation to the processing of personal data for the
purposes of scientific research (including references to processing for
“scientific research purposes”) are references to processing for the
purposes of any research that can reasonably be described as scientific,
whether publicly or privately funded and whether carried out as a
commercial or non-commercial activity.
Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill 3
Part 1—Data protection 
4. Such references—
(a) include processing for the purposes of technological development
or demonstration, fundamental research or applied research, so
5
far as those activities can reasonably be described as scientific,
but
(b) only include processing for the purposes of a study in the area
of public health that can reasonably be described as scientific
where the study is conducted in the public interest.
5.
10
References in this Regulation to the processing of personal data for the
purposes of historical research (including references to processing for
“historical research purposes”) include processing for the purposes of
genealogical research.
6. References in this Regulation to the processing of personal data for
15
statistical purposes are references to processing for statistical surveys
or for the production of statistical results where—
(a) the information that results from the processing is aggregate data
that is not personal data, and
(b) the controller does not use the personal data processed, or the
20
information that results from the processing, in support of
measures or decisions with respect to a particular data subject to
whom the personal data relates.”
3 Consent to processing for the purposes of scientific research
(1) Article 4 of the UK GDPR (definitions) is amended as follows.
(2)
25
In point (11) of paragraph 1(1) (definition of “consent”), at the end insert
“(and see paragraphs 7 and 8 of this Article)”.
(3) After paragraph 6 (inserted by section 2 of this Act) insert—
“7. A data subject’s consent is to be treated as falling within the definition
of “consent” in point (11) of paragraph 1 if—
(a)
30
it does not fall within that definition because (and only because)
the consent is given to the processing of personal data for the
purposes of an area of scientific research,
(b) at the time the consent is sought, it is not possible to identify
fully the purposes for which personal data is to be processed,
(c)
35
seeking consent in relation to the area of scientific research is
consistent with generally recognised ethical standards relevant
to the area of research, and
(d) so far as the intended purposes of the processing allow, the data
subject is given the opportunity to consent only to processing
for part of the research.
4 Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill
Part 1—Data protection 
8. References in this Regulation to consent given for a specific purpose
(however expressed) include consent described in paragraph 7.”
4 Consent to law enforcement processing
(1) The 2018 Act is amended as follows.
(2) In section 33 (definitions), after subsection (1) insert— 5
“(1A) “Consent” of the data subject to the processing of personal data means
a freely given, specific, informed and unambiguous indication of the
data subject’s wishes by which the data subject, by a statement or by
10
a clear affirmative action, signifies agreement to the processing of the
personal data (and see section 40A).”
(3) In section 34(2) (overview of Chapter 2 of Part 3), after paragraph (a) (but
before the “and” at the end of that paragraph) insert—
“(aa) section 40A makes provision about processing carried out in
reliance on the consent of the data subject,”.
(4) After section 40 insert— 15
“40A Conditions for consent
(1) This section is about processing of personal data that is carried out in
reliance on the consent of the data subject.
(2)
20
The controller must be able to demonstrate that the data subject
consented to the processing.
(3) If the data subject’s consent is given in writing as part of a document
which also concerns other matters, the request for consent must be
made—
(a)
25
in a manner which clearly distinguishes the request from the
other matters,
(b) in an intelligible and easily accessible form, and
(c) in clear and plain language.
(4) Any part of a document described in subsection (3) which constitutes
an infringement of this Part is not binding.
(5) The data subject may withdraw the consent at any time (but the 30
withdrawal of consent does not affect the lawfulness of processing in
reliance on the consent before its withdrawal).
(6) Processing may only be carried out in reliance on consent if—
(a)
35
before the consent is given, the controller or processor informs
the data subject of the right to withdraw it, and
(b) it is as easy for the data subject to withdraw the consent as to
give it.
(7) When assessing whether consent is freely given, account must be taken
of, among other things, whether the provision of a service is conditional
Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill 5
Part 1—Data protection 
on consent to the processing of personal data that is not necessary for
the provision of that service.”
(5) In section 206 (index of defined expressions), in the Table, in the entry for
“consent”—
(a) after “consent” insert “(to processing of personal data)”, 5
(b) for “Part” substitute “Parts 3 and”, and
(c) for “section” substitute “sections 33, 40A and”.
Data protection principles
5 Lawfulness of processing
(1) The UK GDPR is amended in accordance with subsections (2) to (5). 10
(2) In Article 6(1) (lawful processing)—
(a) in point (e)—
(i) after “task” insert “of the controller”, and
(ii) after “or” insert “a task carried out”,
(b) after that point insert— 15
“(ea) processing is necessary for the purposes of a recognised
legitimate interest;”, and
(c) in the words after point (f), for “Point (f)” substitute “Points (ea) and
(f)”.
(3) In Article 6(3) (basis for processing etc), in the second subparagraph— 20
(a) after “task” insert “of the controller”, and
(b) after “interest or” insert “a task carried out”.
(4) In Article 6, at the end insert—
“5.
25
For the purposes of paragraph 1(ea), processing is necessary for the
purposes of a recognised legitimate interest only if it meets a condition
in Annex 1.
6. The Secretary of State may by regulations amend Annex 1 by—
(a) adding of varying provisions, or
(b)
30
omitting provisions added by regulations made under this
paragraph.
7. The Secretary of State may only make regulations under paragraph 6
where the Secretary of State considers it appropriate to do so having
regard to, among other things—
(a)
35
the interests and fundamental rights and freedoms of data
subjects which require protection of personal data, and
(b) where relevant, the need to provide children with special
protection with regard to their personal data.
6 Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill
Part 1—Data protection 
8. Regulations under paragraph 6 are subject to the affirmative resolution
procedure.
9. For the purposes of paragraph 1(f), examples of types of processing
5
that may be processing that is necessary for the purposes of a
legitimate interest include—
(a) processing that is necessary for the purposes of direct marketing,
(b) intra-group transmission of personal data (whether relating to
clients, employees or other individuals) where that is necessary
for internal administrative purposes, and
(c) processing that is necessary for the purposes of ensuring the 10
security of network and information systems.
10. In paragraph 9—
“intra-group transmission”means transmission between members
15
of a group of undertakings or between members of a group of
institutions affiliated to a central body;
“security of network and information systems” has the same
meaning as in the Network and Information Systems Regulations
2018 (S.I. 2018/506) (see regulation 1(3)(g)).”
(5) In Article 21(1) (right to object), after “point (e)” insert “, (ea)”.
(6) Schedule 1 inserts Annex 1 to the UK GDPR. 20
(7) In section 8 of the 2018 Act (lawfulness of processing: public interest etc)—
(a) omit “the controller’s”,
(b) at the end of paragraph (c), insert “or”, and
(c) omit paragraph (e) and the “or” before it.
6 The purpose limitation 25
(1) The UK GDPR is amended in accordance with subsections (2) to (5).
(2) In Article 5(1)(b) (purpose limitation)—
(a) after “collected” insert “(whether from the data subject or otherwise)”,
(b) after “further processed” insert “by or on behalf of a controller”, and
(c) for the words “those purposes;” to “initial purposes” substitute “the 30
purposes for which the controller collected the data”.
(3) In Article 5, at the end insert—
“3 For the avoidance of doubt, processing is not lawful by virtue only of
35
being processing in a manner that is compatible with the purposes
for which the personal data was collected.”
(4) In Article 6 (lawfulness of processing), omit paragraph 4.
Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill 7
Part 1—Data protection 
(5) After Article 8 insert—
“Article 8A
Purpose limitation: further processing
1.
5
This Article is about the determination, for the purposes of Article
5(1)(b) (purpose limitation), of whether processing of personal data
by or on behalf of a controller for a purpose (a “new purpose”) other
than the purpose for which the controller collected the data (“the
original purpose”) is processing in a manner compatible with the
original purpose.
2. In making the determination, a person must take into account, among 10
other things—
(a) any link between the original purpose and the new purpose;
(b) the context in which the personal data was collected, including
the relationship between the data subject and the controller;
(c) the nature of the personal data, including whether it is a special 15
category of personal data (see Article 9) or personal data related
to criminal convictions and offences (see Article 10);
(d) the possible consequences of the intended processing for data
subjects;
(e) the existence of appropriate safeguards (for example, encryption 20
or pseudonymisation).
3. Processing of personal data for a new purpose is to be treated as
processing in a manner compatible with the original purpose where—
(a)
25
the data subject consents to the processing of personal data for
the new purpose and the new purpose is specified, explicit and
legitimate,
(b) the processing is carried out in accordance with Article 84B—
(i) for the purposes of scientific research or historical research,
(ii) for the purposes of archiving in the public interest, or
(iii) for statistical purposes, 30
(c) the processing is carried out for the purposes of ensuring that
processing of personal data complies with Article 5(1) or
demonstrating that it does so,
(d) the processing meets a condition in Annex 2, or
(e) the processing is necessary to safeguard an objective listed in 35
Article 23(1)(c) to (j) and is authorised by an enactment or rule
of law.
8 Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill
Part 1—Data protection 
4. Where the controller collected the personal data based on Article 6(1)(a)
(data subject’s consent), processing for a new purpose is only
processing in a manner compatible with the original purpose if—
(a) it falls within paragraph 3(a) or (c), or
(b) it falls within paragraph 3(d) or (e) and the controller cannot 5
reasonably be expected to obtain the data subject’s consent.
5. The Secretary of State may by regulations amend Annex 2 by—
(a) adding or varying provisions, or
(b)
10
omitting provisions added by regulations made under this
paragraph.
6. The Secretary of State may only make regulations under paragraph 5
adding a case to Annex 2 where the Secretary of State considers that
processing in that case is necessary to safeguard an objective listed in
Article 23(1)(c) to (j).
7. Regulations under paragraph 5 may make provision identifying 15
processing by any means, including by reference to the controller, the
data subject, the personal data or the provision of Article 6(1) relied
on for the purposes of the processing.
8.
20
Regulations under paragraph 5 are subject to the affirmative resolution
procedure.”
(6) Schedule 2 inserts Annex 2 to the UK GDPR.
(7) The 2018 Act is amended in accordance with subsections (8) to (10).
(8) In section 36(1) (the second data protection principle)—
(a)
25
in paragraph (a), for “on any occasion” substitute “(whether from the
data subject or otherwise)”, and
(b) in paragraph (b)—
(i) after “processed” insert “by or on behalf of a controller”, and
(ii) for “it was collected” substitute “the controller collected it”.
(9) In section 87(1) (the second data protection principle)—
(a) in paragraph (a), for “on any occasion” substitute “(whether from the 30
data subject or otherwise)”, and
(b) in paragraph (b)—
(i) after “processed” insert “by or on behalf of a controller”, and
(ii) for “it was collected” substitute “the controller collected it”.
(10) In paragraph 1 of Schedule 2 (exemptions etc from the UK GDPR: provisions 35
to be adapted or restricted), omit sub-paragraph (b)(ii).
Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill 9
Part 1—Data protection 
Data subjects' rights
7 Vexatious or excessive requests by data subjects
(1) The UK GDPR is amended in accordance with subsections (2) and (3).
(2)
5
In Article 12 (transparent information, communication and modalities for the
exercise of rights of the data subject)—
(a) in paragraph 2, at the end insert “(or refusal is allowed under Article
12A)”, and
(b) in paragraph 5, omit from “Where requests” to the end.
(3) After that Article insert—
“Article 12A 10
Vexatious or excessive requests
1. Paragraph 2 applies where a request from a data subject under any
of Articles 15 to 22 or 34 is vexatious or excessive.
2. The controller may—
(a) charge a reasonable fee for dealing with the request (see section 15
12 of the 2018 Act), or
(b) refuse to act on the request.
3. In any proceedings where there is an issue as to whether a request is
vexatious or excessive, it is for the controller to show that it is.
4. Whether a request is vexatious or excessive must be determined having 20
regard to the circumstances of the request, including (so far as
relevant)—
(a) the nature of the request,
(b) the relationship between the data subject and the controller,
(c) the resources available to the controller, 25
(d) the extent to which the request repeats a previous request made
by the data subject to the controller,
(e) how long ago any previous request was made, and
(f)
30
whether the request overlaps with other requests made by the
data subject to the controller.
5. Examples of requests that may be vexatious include requests that—
(a) are intended to cause distress,
(b) are not made in good faith, or
(c) are an abuse of process.”
(4) The 2018 Act is amended in accordance with subsections (5) to (11). 35
10 Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill
Part 1—Data protection 
(5) In section 12(1) (limits on fees that may be charged by controllers), in
paragraph (a)—
(a) for “12(5)” substitute “12A”, and
(b) for “manifestly unfounded” substitute “vexatious”.
(6) In section 53 (manifestly unfounded or excessive requests by the data subject 5
under Part 3)—
(a) in the heading, for “Manifestly unfounded” substitute “Vexatious”,
(b) at the beginning insert—
“(A1)
10
Subsection (1) applies where a request from a data subject
under section 45, 46, 47 or 50 is vexatious or excessive (see
section 204A).”,
(c) in subsection (1), omit from the beginning to “excessive,”,
(d) omit subsection (2),
(e) in subsection (3), for “manifestly unfounded” substitute “vexatious”,
(f) after subsection (4) insert— 15
“(4A) The Secretary of State may by regulations—
(a) require controllers of a description specified in the
regulations to produce and publish guidance about the
20
fees that they charge in accordance with subsection
(1)(a), and
(b) specify what the guidance must include.”,
(g) in subsection (5), for “subsection (4)” substitute “this section”, and
(h) after subsection (5) insert—
“(6)
25
If, in reliance on subsection (1)(b), the controller does not take
action on the request, the controller must inform the data
subject of—
(a) the reasons for not doing so, and
(b) the data subject’s right to lodge a complaint with the
Commissioner.
(7) The controller must comply with subsection (6)— 30
(a) without undue delay, and
(b) in any event, before the end of the applicable time
period (as to which see section 54).”
(7)
35
In section 54(1) (meaning of “applicable time period”), for “and 48(2)(b)”
substitute “, 48(2)(b) and 53(7)”.
(8) In section 94 (data subject’s right of access under Part 4)—
(a) after subsection (2) insert—
“(2A) A controller is not obliged to provide information under this
40
section in response to a request that is vexatious or excessive
(see section 204A).”,
(b) in subsection (10), for “subsection (6)” substitute “subsections (2A) to
(6)”, and
Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill 11
Part 1—Data protection 
(c) after subsection (11) insert—
“(11A) In any proceedings where there is an issue as to whether a
request is vexatious or excessive, it is for the controller to show
that it is.”
(9) In section 95 (data subject’s right of access: supplementary), omit subsections 5
(2) and (3).
(10) After section 204 insert—
“204A Vexatious or excessive
(1)
10
For the purposes of this Act, whether a request is vexatious or
excessive must be determined having regard to the circumstances of
the request, including (so far as relevant)—
(a) the nature of the request,
(b) the relationship between the person making the request (the
“sender”) and the person receiving it (the “recipient”),
(c) the resources available to the recipient, 15
(d) the extent to which the request repeats a previous request made
by the sender to the recipient,
(e) how long ago any previous request was made, and
(f)
20
whether the request overlaps with other requests made by the
sender to the recipient.
(2) For the purposes of this Act, examples of requests that may be
vexatious include requests that—
(a) are intended to cause distress,
(b) are not made in good faith, or
(c) are an abuse of process.” 25
(11) In section 206 (index of defined expressions), in the Table, at the appropriate
places insert—
“excessive section 204A”;
“vexatious section 204A”.
8 Time limits for responding to requests by data subjects 30
(1) The UK GDPR is amended in accordance with subsections (2) and (3).
(2) In Article 12 (transparent information, communication and modalities for the
exercise of rights of the data subject)—
(a)
35
in paragraph 3, for “within one month of receipt of the request”
substitute “before the end of the applicable time period (see Article
12B)”,
(b) in paragraph 4, for “without delay and at the latest within one month
of receipt of the request” substitute “without undue delay, and in any
12 Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill
Part 1—Data protection 
event before the end of the applicable time period (see Article 12B),”,
and
(c) in paragraph 6—
(i) after “may” insert “—
(a)”, and 5
(ii) at the end insert “, and
(b) delay dealing with the request until the identity
is confirmed.”
(3) After Article 12A (inserted by section 7 of this Act) insert—
“Article 12B 10
Meaning of “applicable time period”
1. In Article 12, “the applicable time period” means the period of one
month beginning with the relevant time, subject to paragraph 3.
2. “The relevant time” means the latest of the following—
(a) when the controller receives the request in question; 15
(b) when the controller receives the information (if any) requested
in connection with a request under Article 12(6);
(c) when the fee (if any) charged in connection with the request
under Article 12A is paid.
3. The controller may, by giving notice to the data subject, extend the 20
applicable time period by two further months where that is necessary
by reason of—
(a) the complexity of requests made by the data subject, or
(b) the number of such requests.
4. A notice under paragraph 3 must— 25
(a) be given before the end of the period of one month beginning
with the relevant time, and
(b) state the reasons for the delay.
5.
30
Where the controller reasonably requires further information in order
to identify the information or processing activities to which a request
under Article 15 relates—
(a) the controller may ask the data subject to provide the further
information, and
(b)
35
the period beginning with the day on which the controller makes
the request and ending with the day on which the controller
receives the information does not count towards—
(i) the applicable time period, or
(ii) the period described in paragraph 4(a).
Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill 13
Part 1—Data protection 
6. An example of a case in which a controller may reasonably require
further information is where the controller processes a large amount
of information concerning the data subject.”
(4) The 2018 Act is amended in accordance with subsections (5) to (7).
(5) In section 45(5) (right of access by the data subject), after “delay” insert “and 5
in any event before the end of the applicable time period (as to which see
section 54)”.
(6) In section 54 (meaning of “applicable time period” for responding to data
subjects’ requests)—
(a) in subsection (1), after “45(3)(b)” insert “and (5)”, 10
(b) in subsection (2)—
(i) for “1 month, or such longer period as may be specified in
regulations,” substitute “one month”, and
(ii) at the end insert “, subject to subsection (3A)”, and
(c) after subsection (3) insert— 15
“(3A) The controller may, by giving notice to the data subject, extend
the applicable time period by two further months where that
is necessary by reason of—
(a) the complexity of requests made by the data subject, or
(b) the number of such requests. 20
(3B) A notice under subsection (3A) must—
(a) be given before the end of the period of one month
beginning with the relevant time, and
(b) state the reasons for the delay.
(3C) Where the controller reasonably requires further information 25
in order to identify the information or processing activities to
which a request under section 45(1) relates—
(a) the controller may ask the data subject to provide the
further information, and
(b) the period beginning with the day on which the 30
controller makes the request and ending with the day
on which the controller receives the information does
not count towards—
(i) the applicable time period, or
(ii) the period described in subsection (3B)(a). 35
(3D) An example of a case in which a controller may reasonably
require further information is where the controller processes
a large amount of information concerning the data subject.”,
and
(d) omit subsections (4) to (6). 40
(7) In section 94 (right of access under Part 4)—
14 Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill
Part 1—Data protection 
(a) in subsection (14), for the definition of “the applicable time period”
substitute—
““the applicable time period” means the period of one month
5
beginning with the relevant time, subject to subsection (14A);”,
and
(b) after subsection (14) insert—
“(14A) The controller may, by giving notice to the data subject, extend
the applicable time period by two further months where that
is necessary by reason of—
(a) the complexity of requests made by the data subject, or 10
(b) the number of such requests.
(14B) A notice under subsection (14A) must—
(a) be given before the end of the period of one month
beginning with the relevant time, and
(b) state the reasons for the delay.” 15
9 Information to be provided to data subjects
(1) In Article 13 of the UK GDPR (information to be provided where personal
data is collected from the data subject)—
(a)
20
in paragraph 4, for “shall not apply where and insofar as” substitute
“do not apply to the extent that”, and
(b) at the end insert—
“5 Paragraph 3 does not apply to the extent that—
(a) the controller intends to further process the personal
data—
(i) for (and only for) the purposes of scientific or 25
historical research, the purposes of archiving in the
public interest or statistical purposes, and
(ii) in accordance with Article 84B, and
(b)
30
providing the information is impossible or would involve
a disproportionate effort.
6. For the purposes of paragraph 5(b), whether providing
information would involve a disproportionate effort depends
on, among other things, the number of data subjects, the age
35
of the personal data and any appropriate safeguards applied
to the processing.”
(2) In Article 14 of the UK GDPR (information to be provided where personal
data has not been obtained from the data subject)—
(a) in paragraph 5—
(i)
40
for “shall not apply where and insofar as” substitute “do not
apply to the extent that”,
Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill 15
Part 1—Data protection 
(ii) omit point (b),
(iii) omit “or” at the end of point (c),
(iv) in point (d), omit “where”, and
(v) after that point insert—
“(e) providing the information is impossible or would 5
involve a disproportionate effort, or
(f) the obligation referred to in paragraph 1 is likely
to render impossible or seriously impair the
10
achievement of the objectives of the processing
for which the personal data are intended.”
(b) at the end insert—
“6. For the purposes of paragraph 5(e), whether providing
information would involve a disproportionate effort depends
15
on, among other things, the number of data subjects, the age
of the personal data and any appropriate safeguards applied
to the processing.
7. A controller relying on paragraph 5(e) or (f) must take
appropriate measures to protect the data subject’s rights,
20
freedoms and legitimate interests, including by making the
information available publicly.”
10 Data subjects’ rights to information: legal professional privilege exemption
(1) The 2018 Act is amended as follows.
(2) In section 43 (overview and scope of Chapter 3 of Part 3: rights of the data
subject in connection with law enforcement processing)—
(a) in subsection (1)(a), for “section 44” substitute “sections 44 and 45A”, 25
and
(b) in subsection (1)(b), for “section 45” substitute “sections 45 and 45A”.
(3) For the italic heading before section 44 substitute—
“Data subject’s rights to information”.
(4) In the heading of section 44, omit “Information:”. 30
(5) Omit the italic heading before section 45.
(6) After that section insert—
“45A Exemption from sections 44 and 45: legal professional privilege
(1)
35
Sections 44(2) and 45(1) do not require the controller to give the data
subject—
(a) information in respect of which a claim to legal professional
privilege or, in Scotland, confidentiality of communications
could be maintained in legal proceedings, or
16 Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill
Part 1—Data protection 
(b) information in respect of which a duty of confidentiality is
owed by a professional legal adviser to a client of the adviser.
(2) A controller relying on the exemption in subsection (1) must inform
the data subject in writing without undue delay of—
(a) the decision to rely on the exemption, 5
(b) the reason for the decision,
(c) the data subject’s right to make a request to the Commissioner
under section 51,
(d)
10
the data subject’s right to lodge a complaint with the
Commissioner under section 165, and
(e) the data subject’s right to apply to a court under section 167.
(3) Subsection (2)(a) and (b) do not apply to the extent that complying
with them would—
(a) undermine a claim described in subsection (1)(a), or
(b) conflict with a duty described in subsection (1)(b). 15
(4) The controller must—
(a) record the reason for a decision to rely on the exemption in
subsection (1), and
(b)
20
if requested to do so by the Commissioner, make the record
available to the Commissioner.
(5) The reference in subsection (1) to sections 44(2) and 45(1) includes
sections 35 to 40 so far as their provisions correspond to the rights
and obligations provided for in sections 44(2) and 45(1).”
(7) In section 51 (exercise of rights through the Commissioner)—
(a) in subsection (1), after paragraph (b) (but before the “or” at the end 25
of that paragraph) insert—
“(ba) relies on the exemption from sections 44(2) and 45(1)
in section 45A (legal professional privilege),”,
(b) in subsection (2), after paragraph (a) insert—
“(aa) where subsection (1)(ba) applies, request the 30
Commissioner to check that the controller was entitled
to rely on the exemption;”,
(c) in subsection (4), after paragraph (a) insert—
“(aa)
35
where subsection (1)(ba) applies, whether the
Commissioner is satisfied that the controller was entitled
to rely on the exemption;”, and
(d) in subsection (6), after “(a)” insert “, (aa)”.
Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill 17
Part 1—Data protection 
Automated decision-making
11 Automated decision-making
(1) For Article 22 of the UK GDPR (automated individual decision-making,
including profiling) substitute—
“Section 4A 5
Automated individual decision-making
Article 22A
Automated processing and significant decisions
1. For the purposes of Articles 22B and 22C—
(a) a decision is based solely on automated processing if there is no 10
meaningful human involvement in the taking of the decision,
and
(b) a decision is a significant decision, in relation to a data subject,
if—
(i) it produces a legal effect for the data subject, or 15
(ii) it has a similarly significant effect for the data subject.
2. When considering whether there is meaningful human involvement
in the taking of a decision, a person must consider, among other things,
the extent to which the decision is reached by means of profiling.
Article 22B 20
Restrictions on automated decision-making
1. A significant decision based entirely or partly on special categories of
personal data referred to in Article 9(1) may not be taken based solely
25
on automated processing, unless one of the following conditions is
met.
2. The first condition is that the decision is based entirely on processing
of personal data to which the data subject has given explicit consent.
3. The second condition is that—
(a) the decision is—
(i) necessary for entering into, or performing, a contract 30
between the data subject and a controller, or
(ii) required or authorised by law, and
(b) point (g) of Article 9(2) applies.
4.
35
A significant decision may not be taken based solely on automated
processing if the processing of personal data carried out by, or on
behalf of, the decision-maker for the purposes of the decision is carried
out entirely or partly in reliance on Article 6(1)(ea).
18 Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill
Part 1—Data protection 
Article 22C
Safeguards for automated decision-making
1. Where a significant decision taken by or on behalf of a controller in
relation to a data subject is—
(a) based entirely or partly on personal data, and 5
(b) based solely on automated processing,
the controller must ensure that safeguards for the data subject’s rights,
freedoms and legitimate interests are in place which comply with
paragraph 2 and any regulations under Article 22D(4).
2. The safeguards must consist of or include measures which— 10
(a) provide the data subject with information about decisions
described in paragraph 1 taken in relation to the data subject;
(b) enable the data subject to make representations about such
decisions;
(c) enable the data subject to obtain human intervention on the part 15
of the controller in relation to such decisions;
(d) enable the data subject to contest such decisions.
Article 22D
Further provision about automated decision-making
1. The Secretary of State may by regulations provide that, for the 20
purposes of Article 22A(1)(a), there is, or is not, to be taken to be
meaningful human involvement in the taking of a decision in cases
described in the regulations.
2.
25
The Secretary of State may by regulations provide that, for the
purposes of Article 22A(1)(b)(ii), a description of decision is, or is not,
to be taken to have a similarly significant effect for the data subject.
3. Regulations under paragraph 1 or 2 may amend Article 22A.
4. The Secretary of State may by regulations make further provision
30
about the safeguards required under Article 22C(1), including provision
about what is, or is not, to be taken to satisfy a requirement under
Article 22C(1) or (2).
5. Regulations under paragraph 4 may amend Article 22C—
(a) by adding or varying safeguards, and
(b) by omitting provision added by regulations under that paragraph.
6. Regulations under this Article are subject to the affirmative resolution 35
procedure.”
(2) The 2018 Act is amended in accordance with subsections (3) to (5).
Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill 19
Part 1—Data protection 
(3) For sections 49 and 50 (law enforcement processing: automated individual
decision making) substitute—
“50A Automated processing and significant decisions
(1) For the purposes of sections 50B and 50C—
(a) a decision is based solely on automated processing if there is 5
no meaningful human involvement in the taking of the decision,
and
(b) a decision is a significant decision, in relation to a data subject,
if—
(i) it produces an adverse legal effect for the data subject, 10
or
(ii) it has a similarly significant adverse effect for the data
subject.
(2)
15
When considering whether there is meaningful human involvement
in the taking of a decision, a person must consider, among other things,
the extent to which the decision is reached by means of profiling.
50B Restrictions on automated decision-making using sensitive personal
data
(1)
20
A significant decision based entirely or partly on sensitive personal
data may not be taken based solely on automated processing, unless
one of the following conditions is met.
(2) The first condition is that the decision is based entirely on processing
of personal data to which the data subject has given explicit consent.
(3)
25
The second condition is that the decision is required or authorised by
law.
50C Safeguards for automated decision-making
(1) Subject to subsection (3), where a significant decision taken by or on
behalf of a controller in relation to a data subject is—
(a) based entirely or partly on personal data, and
(b) based solely on automated processing, 30
the controller must ensure that safeguards for the data subject’s rights,
freedoms and legitimate interests are in place which comply with
subsection (2) and any regulations under section 50D(4).
(2) The safeguards must consist of or include measures which—
(a) provide the data subject with information about decisions 35
described in subsection (1) taken in relation to the data subject;
(b) enable the data subject to make representations about such
decisions;
(c)
40
enable the data subject to obtain human intervention on the
part of the controller in relation to such decisions;
20 Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill
Part 1—Data protection 
(d) enable the data subject to contest such decisions.
(3) Subsections (1) and (2) do not apply in relation to a significant decision
if—
(a)
5
exemption from those provisions is required for a reason listed
in subsection (4),
(b) the controller reconsiders the decision as soon as reasonably
practicable, and
(c) there is meaningful human involvement in the reconsideration
of the decision.
(4) Those reasons are— 10
(a) to avoid obstructing an official or legal inquiry, investigation
or procedure;
(b) to avoid prejudicing the prevention, detection, investigation or
15
prosecution of criminal offences or the execution of criminal
penalties;
(c) to protect public security;
(d) to safeguard national security;
(e) to protect the rights and freedoms of others.
(5)
20
When considering whether there is meaningful human involvement
in the reconsideration of a decision, a person must consider, among
other things, the extent to which the conclusion reached on
reconsideration is reached by means of profiling.
50D Further provision about automated decision-making
(1)
25
The Secretary of State may by regulations provide that, for the
purposes of sections 50A(1)(a) and 50C(3)(c), there is, or is not, to be
taken to be meaningful human involvement in the taking or
reconsideration of a decision in cases described in the regulations.
(2) The Secretary of State may by regulations provide that, for the
30
purposes of section 50A(1)(b)(ii), a description of decision is, or is not,
to be taken to have a similarly significant adverse effect for the data
subject.
(3) Regulations under subsection (1) or (2) may amend section 50A.
(4) The Secretary of State may by regulations make further provision
35
about the safeguards required under section 50C(1), including provision
about what is, or is not, to be taken to satisfy a requirement under
section 50C(1) or (2).
(5) Regulations under subsection (4) may amend section 50C—
(a) by adding or varying safeguards, and
(b)
40
by omitting provision added by regulations under that
subsection.
Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill 21
Part 1—Data protection 
(6) Regulations under this section are subject to the affirmative resolution
procedure.”
(4) In section 96 (intelligence services processing: right not to be subject to
automated decision-making)—
(a) in subsection (1), for “solely on” substitute “on entirely”, 5
(b) in subsection (3), after “section” insert “and section 97”, and
(c) at the end insert—
“(4) For the purposes of this section and section 97, a decision is
10
based on entirely automated processing if the decision-making
process does not include an opportunity for a human being to
accept, reject or influence the decision.”
(5) In section 97 (intelligence services processing: right to intervene in automated
decision-making)—
(a) in subsection (1)(a), for “solely on” substitute “on entirely”,
(b) in subsection (4)(b), for “solely on” substitute “on entirely”, and 15
(c) omit subsection (6).
(6) Schedule 3 contains amendments consequential on this section.
Obligations of controllers and processors
12 General obligations
(1) The UK GDPR is amended in accordance with subsections (2) to (4). 20
(2) In Article 24(1) (responsibility of the controller), for “appropriate technical
and organisational measures” substitute “appropriate measures, including
technical and organisational measures,”.
(3) In Article 25 (data protection by design and by default)—
(a) in paragraph 1, for “appropriate technical and organisational measures” 25
substitute “appropriate measures, including technical and organisational
measures”, and
(b) in paragraph 2, for “appropriate technical and organisational measures”
30
substitute “appropriate measures, including technical and organisational
measures,”.
(4) In Article 28 (processor)—
(a) in paragraph 1, for “appropriate technical and organisational measures”
substitute “appropriate measures, including technical and organisational
measures”,
(b) in paragraph 3(e), for “appropriate technical and organisational 35
measures” substitute “appropriate measures, including technical and
organisational measures”, and
(c) in paragraph 4, for “appropriate technical and organisational measures”
40
substitute “appropriate measures, including technical and organisational
measures”.
22 Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill
Part 1—Data protection 
(5) The 2018 Act is amended in accordance with subsections (6) to (10).
(6) In section 55(3) (overview and scope of provisions about controllers and
processors), omit “technical and organisational”.
(7) In section 56 (general obligations of the controller)—
(a) in subsection (1), for “appropriate technical and organisational 5
measures” substitute “appropriate measures, including technical and
organisational measures,”, and
(b) in subsection (3), omit “technical and organisational”.
(8) In section 57 (data protection by design and by default)—
(a) in subsection (1), for “appropriate technical and organisational 10
measures” substitute “appropriate measures, including technical and
organisational measures,”, and
(b) in subsection (3), for “appropriate technical and organisational
15
measures” substitute “appropriate measures, including technical and
organisational measures,”.
(9) In section 59(2) (processors), for “appropriate technical and organisational
measures” substitute “appropriate measures, including technical and
organisational measures,”.
(10)
20
In section 103(2) (data protection by design), for “appropriate technical and
organisational measures” substitute “appropriate measures, including technical
and organisational measures,”.
13 Removal of requirement for representatives for controllers etc outside the
UK
(1)
25
Omit Article 27 of the UK GDPR (representatives of controllers or processors
not established in the United Kingdom).
(2) In consequence of that revocation, in the UK GDPR—
(a) in Article 4 omit point (17) (definition of “representative”),
(b) in Article 13(1)(a) (information to be provided where personal data is
30
collected from the data subject) omit “and, where applicable, of the
controller’s representative”,
(c) in Article 14(1)(a) (information to be provided where personal data is
not obtained from the data subject) omit “and, where applicable, of
the controller’s representative”,
(d) in Article 30 (records of processing activities)—
(i) in paragraph 1, in the words before point (a), omit “and, where 35
applicable, the controller’s representative,”,
(ii) in paragraph 1(a) omit “, the controller’s representative”,
(iii) in paragraph 2, in the words before point (a), omit “and, where
applicable, the processor’s representative”,
(iv) in paragraph 2(a), for “, and, where applicable, of the 40
controller’s or the processor’s representative, and” substitute
“and of”, and
Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill 23
Part 1—Data protection 
(v) in paragraph 4 omit “and, where applicable, the controller’s
or the processor’s representative,”,
(e) in Article 31 (cooperation with the Commissioner) omit “and, where
applicable, their representatives,”, and
(f) in Article 58(1)(a) (Commissioner’s powers) omit “, and, where 5
applicable, the controller’s or the processor’s representative”.
(3) In consequence of that revocation, in the 2018 Act—
(a) in section 142 (information notices) omit subsection (9),
(b) in section 143 (information notices: restrictions) omit subsection (9),
(c) in section 181 (interpretation of Part 6) omit the definition of 10
“representative”,
(d) in section 206 (index of defined expressions), in the Table, omit the
entry for “representative (in Part 6)”, and
(e)
15
in paragraph 41 of Schedule 1 (additional safeguards for processing
of special categories of personal data etc: record of processing) omit
“, or the controller’s representative,”.
(4) In consequence of the amendments in subsection (3), in Schedule 2 to the
Electronic Identification and Trust Services for Electronic Transactions
Regulations 2016 (S.I. 2016/696) (Commissioner’s enforcement powers)—
(a) in paragraph 3(1), for “subsections (9) and (10)” substitute “subsection 20
(10)”, and
(b) in paragraph 4(1), for “subsections (1) and (9)” substitute “subsection
(1)”.
14 Senior responsible individual
(1) The UK GDPR is amended in accordance with subsections (2) and (3). 25
(2) Before Article 28 insert—
“Section 1A
Senior responsible individual
Article 27A
Designation of senior responsible individual 30
1. This Article and Articles 27B and 27C apply to a controller or processor
that—
(a) is a public body, or
(b)
35
carries out processing of personal data which, taking into account
the nature, scope, context and purposes of the processing, is
likely to result in a high risk to the rights and freedoms of
individuals,
other than a court or tribunal acting in its judicial capacity.
24 Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill
Part 1—Data protection 
2. The controller or processor must designate one individual to be its
senior responsible individual, subject to paragraph 3(b).
3. Where the controller or processor is an organisation—
(a)
5
a designated individual must be part of the organisation’s senior
management, and
(b) the controller or processor may designate two or more
individuals to act jointly as its senior responsible individual
where the individuals are employed part-time and share a single
role within the organisation’s senior management.
4. The controller or processor must— 10
(a) ensure that the current contact details of the senior responsible
individual are publicly available, and
(b) send those details to the Commissioner.
5.
15
In this Article, “senior management”, in relation to an organisation,
means the individuals who play significant roles in the making of
decisions about how the whole or a substantial part of its activities
are to be managed or organised.
Article 27B
Senior responsible individual’s tasks
1. The senior responsible individual designated by a controller must be 20
responsible at least for performing the tasks listed in paragraph 2 or
securing that they are performed by another person.
2. Those tasks are—
(a)
25
monitoring compliance by the controller with the data protection
legislation;
(b) ensuring that the controller develops, implements, reviews and
updates measures to ensure its compliance with the data
protection legislation;
(c)
30
informing and advising the controller, any processor engaged
by the controller and employees of the controller who carry out
processing of personal data of their obligations under the data
protection legislation;
(d) organising training for employees of the controller who carry
out processing of personal data;
(e) dealing with complaints made to the controller in connection 35
with the processing of personal data;
(f) dealing with personal data breaches;
(g) co-operating with the Commissioner on behalf of the controller;
(h)
40
acting as the contact point for the Commissioner on issues
relating to processing of personal data.
Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill 25
Part 1—Data protection 
3. The senior responsible individual designated by a processor must be
responsible at least for performing the tasks listed in paragraph 4 or
securing that they are performed by another person.
4. Those tasks are—
(a) monitoring compliance by the processor with Articles 28, 30A 5
and 32;
(b) co-operating with the Commissioner on behalf of the processor;
(c) acting as the contact point for the Commissioner on issues
relating to processing of personal data.
5. Where the performance of one of its tasks would result in a conflict 10
of interests, the senior responsible individual must secure that the task
is performed by another person.
6. In deciding whether one or more of their tasks should be performed
15
by another person (whether alone or jointly with others) and, if so,
by whom, the senior responsible individual must consider, among
other things—
(a) the other person’s professional qualifications and knowledge of
the data protection legislation,
(b)
20
the resources likely to be available to the other person to carry
out the task, and
(c) whether the other person is involved in day-to-day processing
of personal data for the controller or processor and, if so, whether
that affects the person’s ability to perform the task.
Article 27C
Senior responsible individual’s position 25
1. A controller or processor must support its senior responsible individual
in the performance of the individual’s tasks, including by providing
the individual with appropriate resources.
2.
30
A controller or processor must not dismiss or penalise its senior
responsible individual for performing the individual’s tasks.
3. Where the senior responsible individual decides that one or more of
its tasks should be performed by another person, the controller or
processor must ensure that the person—
(a) has appropriate resources to perform the task,
(b) is not dismissed or penalised by the controller or processor for 35
performing the task, and
(c) does not receive instructions about the performance of the task.
4. Paragraph 3(c) does not require the controller or processor to prevent
40
instructions being given by the senior responsible individual or another
person performing a task for the senior responsible individual, except
where such instructions would involve a conflict of interests.
26 Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill
Part 1—Data protection 
Section 1B
Processor etc”.
(3) Omit Articles 37 to 39 (designation, position and tasks of data protection
officer) and the section heading before Article 37.
(4) The 2018 Act is amended in accordance with subsections (5) and (6). 5
(5) After section 58 insert—
“Senior responsible individual
58A Designation of senior responsible individual
(1)
10
This section and sections 58B and 58C apply to all controllers and
processors other than a court, or other judicial authority, acting in its
judicial capacity.
(2) The controller or processor must designate one individual to be its
senior responsible individual.
(3) Where the controller or processor is an organisation—
(a) a designated individual must be part of the organisation’s 15
senior management, and
(b) the controller or processor may designate two or more
individuals to act jointly as its senior responsible individual
20
where the individuals are employed part-time and share a
single role within the organisation’s senior management.
(4) The controller or processor must—
(a) ensure that the current contact details of the senior responsible
individual are publicly available, and
(b) send those details to the Commissioner.
(5) In this section, “senior management”, in relation to an organisation, 25
means the individuals who play significant roles in the making of
decisions about how the whole or a substantial part of its activities
are to be managed or organised.
58B Tasks of the senior responsible individual
(1) The senior responsible individual designated by a controller must be 30
responsible at least for performing the tasks listed in subsection (2) or
securing that they are performed by another person.
(2) Those tasks are—
(a)
35
monitoring compliance by the controller with the data
protection legislation;
(b) ensuring that the controller develops, implements, reviews and
updates measures to ensure its compliance with the data
protection legislation;
Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill 27
Part 1—Data protection 
(c) informing and advising the controller, any processor engaged
by the controller and employees of the controller who carry
out processing of personal data of their obligations under the
data protection legislation;
(d) organising training for employees of the controller who carry 5
out processing of personal data;
(e) dealing with complaints made to the controller in connection
with the processing of personal data;
(f) dealing with personal data breaches;
(g) co-operating with the Commissioner on behalf of the controller; 10
(h) acting as the contact point for the Commissioner on issues
relating to processing of personal data.
(3) The senior responsible individual designated by a processor must be
15
responsible at least for performing the tasks listed in subsection (4) or
securing that they are performed by another person.
(4) Those tasks are—
(a) monitoring compliance by the processor with sections 59, 61A
and 66;
(b) co-operating with the Commissioner on behalf of the processor;
(c) acting as the contact point for the Commissioner on issues 20
relating to processing of personal data.
(5) Where the performance of one of its tasks would result in a conflict
of interests, the senior responsible individual must secure that the task
is performed by another person.
(6) In deciding whether one or more of their tasks should be performed 25
by another person (whether alone or jointly with others), and, if so,
by whom, the senior responsible individual must consider, among
other things—
(a)
30
the other person’s professional qualifications and knowledge
of the data protection legislation,
(b) the resources likely to be available to the other person to carry
out the task, and
(c) whether the other person is involved in day-to-day processing
35
of personal data for the controller or processor and, if so,
whether that affects the person’s ability to perform the task.
58C Senior responsible individual’s position
(1) A controller or processor must support its senior responsible individual
in the performance of the individual’s tasks, including by providing
the individual with appropriate resources.
(2) A controller or processor must not dismiss or penalise its senior 40
responsible individual for performing the individual’s tasks.
28 Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill
Part 1—Data protection 
(3) Where its senior responsible individual decides that one or more of
its tasks should be performed by another person, the controller or
processor must ensure that the person—
(a) has appropriate resources to perform the task,
(b) is not dismissed or penalised by the controller or processor for 5
performing the task, and
(c) does not receive instructions about the performance of the task.
(4) Subsection (3)(c) does not require the controller or processor to prevent
10
instructions being given by the senior responsible individual or another
person performing a task for the senior responsible individual, except
where such instructions would involve a conflict of interests.
Processor etc”.
(6) Omit sections 69 to 71 (designation, position and tasks of data protection
officer) and the italic heading before section 69.
15 Duty to keep records 15
(1) The UK GDPR is amended in accordance with subsections (2) to (4).
(2) Before Article 30 insert—
“Section 1C
Records and co-operation with the Commissioner”.
(3) Omit Article 30 (records of processing activities). 20
(4) After that Article insert—
“Article 30A
Records of processing of personal data
1. In this Article—
(a) paragraphs 2 to 4, 8 and 9 apply to a controller that carries out 25
processing of personal data which, taking into account the nature,
scope, context and purposes of the processing, is likely to result
in a high risk to the rights and freedoms of individuals, and
(b)
30
paragraphs 5 to 9 apply to a processor that carries out such
processing.
2. The controller must maintain appropriate records of processing of
personal data carried out by or on behalf of the controller.
Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill 29
Part 1—Data protection 
3. The controller’s records must include at least the following information
about the personal data in respect of which the controller is for the
time being a controller—
(a)
5
where the personal data is (including information about any
personal data that is outside the United Kingdom),
(b) the purposes for which the controller is processing the personal
data,
(c) the categories of person with whom the controller has shared,
10
or intends to share, the personal data (including persons who
are in third countries or international organisations),
(d) how long the controller intends to retain the personal data,
(e) whether the personal data includes special categories of personal
data referred to in Article 9(1) and, if so, which categories, and
(f)
15
whether the personal data includes personal data relating to
criminal convictions and offences or related security measures
referred to in Article 10(1) and, if so, which types of such data.
4. Where possible, the controller’s records must include information
about how it ensures that personal data is secure.
5.
20
The processor must maintain appropriate records of its processing of
personal data.
6. The processor’s records must include at least the following information
about the personal data in respect of which it is for the time being a
processor—
(a)
25
the name and contact details of each controller on behalf of which
the processor is acting, and
(b) where the personal data is (including information about any
personal data that is outside the United Kingdom).
7. Where possible, the processor’s records must include information
about how it ensures that personal data is secure.
8. A controller or processor must make the records maintained under 30
this Article available to the Commissioner on request.
9. In deciding what is appropriate for the purposes of this Article, a
controller or processor must take into account, among other things—
(a)
35
the nature, scope, context and purposes of processing carried
out by or on behalf of the controller or by the processor,
(b) the risks for the rights and freedoms of individuals arising from
that processing, including the likelihood of risks arising and their
severity, and
(c) the resources available to the controller or processor.”
(5) The 2018 Act is amended in accordance with subsections (6) to (9). 40
30 Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill
Part 1—Data protection 
(6) In section 42 (safeguards: sensitive processing), omit subsection (4).
(7) Before section 61 insert—
“Records and co-operation with the Commissioner”.
(8) Omit section 61 (records of processing activities).
(9) After that section insert— 5
“61A Records of processing of personal data
(1) Each controller must maintain appropriate records of processing of
personal data carried out by or on behalf of the controller.
(2)
10
The controller’s records must include at least the following information
about the personal data in respect of which the controller is for the
time being a controller—
(a) where the personal data is (including information about any
personal data that is outside the United Kingdom),
(b)
15
the purposes for which the controller is processing the personal
data,
(c) the categories of person with whom the controller has shared,
or intends to share, the personal data (including persons who
are in third countries or international organisations),
(d)
20
how long the controller intends to retain the personal data,
and
(e) whether the personal data includes personal data described in
section 35(8) and, if so, which types of such data.
(3) Where possible, the controller’s records must include information
about how it ensures that personal data is secure.
(4) Each processor must maintain appropriate records of its processing 25
of personal data.
(5) The processor’s records must include at least the following information
about the personal data in respect of which it is for the time being a
processor—
(a) the name and contact details of each controller on behalf of 30
which the processor is acting, and
(b) where the personal data is (including information about any
personal data that is outside the United Kingdom).
(6)
35
Where possible, the processor’s records must include information
about how it ensures that personal data is secure.
(7) A controller or processor must make the records maintained under
this section available to the Commissioner on request.
(8) In deciding what is appropriate for the purposes of this section, a
controller or processor must take into account, among other things—
Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill 31
Part 1—Data protection 
(a) the nature, scope, context and purposes of processing carried
out by or on behalf of the controller or by the processor,
(b) the risks for the rights and freedoms of individuals arising
5
from that processing, including the likelihood of risks arising
and their severity, and
(c) the resources available to the controller or processor.”
16 Logging of law enforcement processing
In section 62 of the 2018 Act (logging of law enforcement processing)—
(a) in subsection (2)(a), omit “justification for, and”, and
(b) in subsection (3)(a), omit “justification for, and”. 10
17 Assessment of high risk processing
(1) The UK GDPR is amended in accordance with subsections (2) to (4).
(2) In the heading of Section 3 of Chapter 4, for “Data protection impact
assessment” substitute “Assessment of high risk processing”.
(3) In Article 35 (data protection impact assessment)— 15
(a) for the heading substitute “Assessment of high risk processing”,
(b) in paragraph 1, for “natural persons” substitute “individuals”,
(c) omit paragraphs 2 to 5,
(d) for paragraph 7 substitute—
“7 The controller must produce a document recording 20
compliance with this Article which includes at least—
(a) a summary of the purposes of the processing,
(b) an assessment of whether the processing is necessary
for those purposes,
(c) an assessment of the risks to individuals referred to 25
in paragraph 1, and
(d) a description of how the controller proposes to
mitigate those risks.”,
(e)
30
in paragraph 8, for “, in particular for the purposes of a data protection
impact assessment” substitute “for the purposes of an assessment
required by paragraph 1”,
(f) omit paragraph 9,
(g) in paragraph 10—
(i)
35
for “a data protection impact assessment” substitute “an
assessment of the envisaged processing operations on the
protection of personal data”, and
(ii) omit “for the processing”, and
(h) in paragraph 11—
(i) omit “Where necessary,”, and
32 Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill
Part 1—Data protection 
(ii) for “to assess if processing is performed in accordance with
the data protection impact assessment” substitute “of an
assessment pursuant to paragraph 1 where necessary and”.
(4)
5
In Article 57(1) (Information Commissioner’s tasks), for paragraph (k)
substitute—
“(k) produce and publish a document containing examples of types
of processing which the Commissioner considers are likely to
result in a high risk to the rights and freedoms of individuals
(for the purposes of Articles 27A, 30A and 35);”.
(5) The 2018 Act is amended in accordance with subsections (6) and (7). 10
(6) Before section 64 insert—
“Risk assessment and prior consultation”.
(7) In section 64 (data protection impact assessment)—
(a) for the heading substitute “Assessment of high risk processing”,
(b) in subsection (1), for “a data protection impact assessment” substitute 15
“an assessment of the impact of the envisaged processing operations
on the protection of personal data”,
(c) omit subsection (2), and
(d) for subsection (3) substitute—
“(3) The controller must produce a document recording compliance 20
with this section which includes at least—
(a) a summary of the purposes of the processing,
(b) an assessment of whether the processing is necessary
for those purposes,
(c) an assessment of the risks to the rights and freedoms 25
of individuals referred to in subsection (1), and
(d) a description of how the controller proposes to mitigate
those risks.”
18 Consulting the Commissioner prior to processing
(1) Article 36 of the UK GDPR (prior consultation) is amended in accordance 30
with subsections (2) and (3).
(2) In paragraph 1—
(a) for “shall” substitute “may”,
(b)
35
for “a data protection impact assessment” substitute “an assessment”,
and
(c) after “high risk” insert “to the rights and freedoms of individuals”.
(3) In paragraph 3—
(a) in point (d), for “data protection officer” substitute “senior responsible
individual”, and
(b) in point (e) omit “data protection impact”. 40
Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill 33
Part 1—Data protection 
(4) Section 65 of the 2018 Act (prior consultation) is amended in accordance with
subsections (5) and (6).
(5) In subsection (2)—
(a) for “must” substitute “may”,
(b) for “if a data protection impact assessment prepared” substitute “where 5
an assessment”, and
(c) for “(in the absence of measures to mitigate the risk)” substitute “in
the absence of measures taken by the controller to mitigate the risk”.
(6) In subsection (3)—
(a) for “is required to consult” substitute “consults”, 10
(b) omit paragraph (a) (and the “and” after it), and
(c) in paragraph (b), omit “other”.
19 Law enforcement processing and codes of conduct
(1) The 2018 Act is amended as follows.
(2) In section 55(1) (overview and scope of provisions about controllers and 15
processors), at the end insert—
“(e) makes provision about codes of conduct (see section 68A).”
(3) In section 56 (general obligations of the controller), at the end insert—
“(4)
20
Adherence to a code of conduct approved under section 68A may be
used by a controller as a means of demonstrating compliance with
the requirements of this Part.”
(4) In section 59 (processors), after subsection (7) insert—
“(7A) Adherence to a code of conduct approved under section 68A may be
25
used by a processor as a means of demonstrating sufficient guarantees
as described in subsection (2).”
(5) In section 66 (security of processing), at the end insert—
“(3) Adherence to a code of conduct approved under section 68A may be
used by a controller or processor as a means of demonstrating
compliance with subsection (1).”
(6) After section 68 insert— 30
“Codes of conduct
68A Codes of conduct
(1) The Commissioner must encourage expert public bodies to produce
codes of conduct intended to contribute to compliance with this Part.
(2) Under subsection (1), the Commissioner must, among other things, 35
encourage the production of codes which take account of the specific
features of the various processing sectors.
34 Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill
Part 1—Data protection 
(3) For the purposes of this section—
(a) “public body” means a body or other person whose functions
are, or include, functions of a public nature, and
(b)
5
a public body is “expert” if, in the Commissioner’s opinion,
the body has the knowledge and experience needed to produce
a code of conduct described in subsection (1).
(4) A code of conduct described in subsection (1) may, for example, make
provision with regard to—
(a) lawful and fair processing;
(b) the collection of personal data; 10
(c) the information provided to the public and to data subjects;
(d) the exercise of the rights of data subjects;
(e) the measures and procedures referred to in sections 56, 57 and
62;
(f) the notification of personal data breaches to the Commissioner 15
and the communication of personal data breaches to data
subjects;
(g) the transfer of personal data to third countries or international
organisations;
(h) out-of-court proceedings and other dispute resolution 20
procedures for resolving disputes between controllers and data
subjects with regard to processing.
(5) Where an expert public body prepares a code of conduct described
25
in subsection (1), it must submit the code to the Commissioner in
draft.
(6) Where an expert public body submits a draft code to the Commissioner
under this section, the Commissioner must—
(a) provide the body with an opinion on whether the draft code
correctly reflects the requirements of this Part,
(b) decide whether to approve the code, and 30
(c) if the code is approved, register and publish the code.
(7) Subsections (5) and (6) apply in relation to amendments of a code of
conduct described in subsection (1) as they apply in relation to such
a code.”
20 Obligations of controllers and processors: consequential amendments 35
Schedule 4 contains amendments consequential on this group of sections.
International transfers of personal data
21 Transfers of personal data to third countries and international organisations
(1)
40
Schedule 5 amends Chapter 5 of the UK GDPR (general processing and
transfers of personal data to third countries and international organisations).
Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill 35
Part 1—Data protection 
(2) Schedule 6 amends Chapter 5 of Part 3 of the 2018 Act (law enforcement
processing and transfers of personal data to third countries and international
organisations).
(3) Schedule 7 contains consequential and transitional provision.
Safeguards for processing for research etc purposes 5
22 Safeguards for processing for research etc purposes
(1) The UK GDPR is amended in accordance with subsections (2) to (4).
(2) After Chapter 8 insert—
“CHAPTER 8A
Safeguards for processing for research, archiving or statistical purposes 10
Article 84A
Research, archives and statistics
1. This Chapter makes provision about the processing of personal data—
(a) for the purposes of scientific research or historical research,
(b) for the purposes of archiving in the public interest, or 15
(c) for statistical purposes.
2. Those purposes are referred to in this Chapter as “RAS purposes”.
Article 84B
Additional requirements when processing for RAS purposes
1. Processing of personal data for RAS purposes must be carried out 20
subject to appropriate safeguards for the rights and freedoms of the
data subject.
2. Processing of personal data for RAS purposes must be carried out in
25
a manner which does not permit the identification of a living
individual.
3. Paragraph 2 does not apply—
(a) to the collection of personal data (whether from the data subject
or otherwise), or
(b)
30
to cases in which the RAS purposes cannot be fulfilled by further
processing in the manner described in that paragraph.
4. For the purposes of paragraph 2, processing permits the identification
of a living individual only in cases described in section 3A(2) and (3)
of the 2018 Act (information relating to an identifiable living
individual).
36 Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill
Part 1—Data protection 
Article 84C
Appropriate safeguards
1. This Article makes provision about when the requirement under Article
5
84B(1) for processing of personal data to be carried out subject to
appropriate safeguards is satisfied.
2. The requirement is not satisfied if the processing is likely to cause
substantial damage or substantial distress to a data subject to whom
the personal data relates.
3.
10
The requirement is not satisfied if the processing is carried out for the
purposes of measures or decisions with respect to a particular data
subject to whom the personal data relates, except where the purposes
for which the processing is carried out include the purposes of
approved medical research.
4.
15
The requirement is only satisfied if the safeguards include technical
and organisational measures for the purpose of ensuring respect for
the principle of data minimisation (see Article 5(1)(c)), such as, for
example, pseudonymisation.
5. In this Article—
20
“approved medical research” means medical research carried
out by a person who has approval to carry out that research
from—
(a) a research ethics committee recognised or established by
the Health Research Authority under Chapter 2 of Part 3
of the Care Act 2014, or
(b) a body appointed by any of the following for the purpose 25
of assessing the ethics of research involving individuals—
(i) the Secretary of State, the Scottish Ministers, the
Welsh Ministers or a Northern Ireland department;
(ii) a relevant NHS body;
(iii) United Kingdom Research and Innovation or a body 30
that is a Research Council for the purposes of the
Science and Technology Act 1965;
(iv) an institution that is a research institution for the
35
purposes of Chapter 4A of Part 7 of the Income Tax
(Earnings and Pensions) Act 2003 (see section 457 of
that Act);
“relevant NHS body”means—
(a) an NHS trust or NHS foundation trust in England,
(b) an NHS trust or Local Health Board in Wales,
Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill 37
Part 1—Data protection 
(c) a Health Board or Special Health Board constituted under
section 2 of the National Health Service (Scotland) Act
1978,
(d)
5
the Common Services Agency for the Scottish Health
Service, or
(e) any of the health and social care bodies in Northern Ireland
falling within paragraphs (b) to (e) of section 1(5) of the
Health and Social Care (Reform) Act (Northern Ireland)
2009 (c. 1 (N.I.)).
Article 84D 10
Appropriate safeguards: further provision
1. The Secretary of State may by regulations make further provision
about when the requirement for appropriate safeguards under Article
84B(1) is satisfied.
2. The power under this Article includes power to amend Article 84C 15
by adding, varying or omitting provision, except that it does not
include power—
(a) to vary or omit paragraph 1 of that Article, or
(b) to omit any of paragraphs 2 to 4 of that Article.
3. Regulations under this Article are subject to the affirmative resolution 20
procedure.”
(3) In the heading of Chapter 9, after “relating to” insert “other”.
(4) Omit Article 89 (safeguards and derogations relating to processing for
25
archiving purposes in the public interest, scientific or historical research
purposes or statistical purposes).
(5) The 2018 Act is amended in accordance with subsections (6) and (7).
(6) Omit section 19 (processing for archiving, research and statistical purposes:
safeguards) and the italic heading before it.
(7)
30
In section 41(1) (safeguards: archiving), for “necessary” substitute “carried
out”.
23 Section 22: consequential provision
(1) In the UK GDPR—
(a) in Article 5(1)(e) (storage limitation), for “Article 89(1)” to “data subject”
substitute “Article 84B”,
(b) in Article 9(2)(j) (processing of special categories of personal data), for 35
“in accordance with Article 89(1) (as supplemented by section 19 of
the 2018 Act)” substitute “, is carried out in accordance with Article
84B and is”,
38 Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill
Part 1—Data protection 
(c) in Article 17(3)(d) (right to erasure), for “Article 89(1)” substitute
“Article 84B”, and
(d) in Article 21(6) (right to object), omit “pursuant to Article 89(1)”.
(2) In the 2018 Act—
(a) in section 24(4) (manual unstructured data held by FOI public 5
authorities), after paragraph (b) insert—
“(ba) Chapter 8A (safeguards for processing for research,
archiving or statistical purposes);”,
(b)
10
in paragraph 4(b) of Schedule 1 (special categories of personal data
and criminal convictions etc data: research etc), for “Article 89(1) of
the UK GDPR (as supplemented by section 19)” substitute “Article
84B of the UK GDPR”, and
(c) in Schedule 2 (exemptions etc from the UK GDPR)—
(i)
15
in paragraph 27(3)(a) (research and statistics), for “Article 89(1)
of the UK GDPR (as supplemented by section 19)” substitute
“Article 84B of the UK GDPR”, and
(ii) in paragraph 28(3) (archiving), for “Article 89(1) of the UK
GDPR (as supplemented by section 19)” substitute “Article 84B
of the UK GDPR”.
(3) In section 279(2) of the Mental Health (Care and Treatment) (Scotland) Act 20
2003 (asp 13) (information for research), for “Article 89(1) of the UK GDPR
(archiving in the public interest, scientific or historical research and statistics)”
substitute “Article 84A of the UK GDPR (research, archives and statistics)”.
National Security
24 National security exemption 25
(1) The 2018 Act is amended in accordance with subsections (2) to (10).
(2) In section 26(2)(f) (national security and defence exemption), before
sub-paragraph (i) insert—
“(zi)
30
Article 77 (right to lodge a complaint with the
Commissioner);”.
(3) In section 44 (controller’s general duties to provide information to data
subject)—
(a) in subsection (4), omit paragraph (d) (grounds for restricting
information provided: national security),
(b) in subsection (5), after “restricted” insert “under subsection (4)”, and 35
(c) in subsection (7)(a), after “subsection (2)” insert “in reliance on
subsection (4)”.
(4) In section 45 (right of access by the data subject)—
(a)
40
in subsection (4), omit paragraph (d) (grounds for restricting
information provided: national security),
Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill 39
Part 1—Data protection 
(b) in subsection (5), after “restricted” insert “under subsection (4)”, and
(c) in subsection (7)(a), after “subsection (1)” insert “in reliance on
subsection (4)”.
(5)
5
In section 48 (requests by data subject for rectification or erasure of personal
data)—
(a) in subsection (3), omit paragraph (d) (grounds for restricting
information provided: national security),
(b) in subsection (4)—
(i) for “(1)” substitute “(1)(b)(i)”, and
(ii) after “restricted” insert “under subsection (3)”, and 10
(c) in subsection (6)(a), after “subsection (1)(b)(i)” insert “in reliance on
subsection (3)”.
(6) In section 68(7) (communication of a personal data breach to the data subject:
15
grounds for restricting information provided), omit paragraph (d) (national
security).
(7) In Chapter 6 of Part 3 (law enforcement processing: supplementary), before
section 79 insert—
“78A National security exemption
(1)
20
A provision mentioned in subsection (2) does not apply to personal
data processed for law enforcement purposes if exemption from the
provision is required for the purposes of safeguarding national security.
(2) The provisions are—
(a) Chapter 2 of this Part (principles), except for the provisions
listed in subsection (3);
(b) Chapter 3 of this Part (rights of the data subject); 25
(c) in Chapter 4 of this Part—
(i) section 67 (notification of personal data breach to the
Commissioner);
(ii)
30
section 68 (communication of personal data breach to
the data subject);
(d) Chapter 5 of this Part (transfers of personal data to third
countries etc), except for the provisions listed in subsection (4);
(e) in Part 5—
(i)
35
section 119 (inspection in accordance with international
obligations);
(ii) in Schedule 13 (other general functions of the
Commissioner), paragraphs 1(1)(a) and (g) and 2;
(f) in Part 6—
(i)
40
sections 142 to 154 and Schedule 15 (Commissioner’s
notices and powers of entry and inspection);
(ii) sections 170 to 173 (offences relating to personal data);
(g) in Part 7, section 187 (representation of data subjects).
40 Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill
Part 1—Data protection 
(3) The provisions of Chapter 2 of this Part (principles) which are excepted
from the list in subsection (2) are—
(a) section 35(1) (the first data protection principle) so far as it
requires processing of personal data to be lawful;
(b) section 35(2) to (5) (lawfulness of processing and restrictions 5
on sensitive processing);
(c) section 42 (safeguards: sensitive processing);
(d) Schedule 8 (conditions for sensitive processing).
(4)
10
The provisions of Chapter 5 of this Part (transfers of personal data to
third countries etc) which are excepted from the list in subsection (2)
are—
(a) the following provisions of section 73—
(i) subsection (1)(a) (conditions for transfer), so far as it
15
relates to the condition in subsection (2) of that section,
and subsection (2) (transfer must be necessary for a law
enforcement purpose);
(ii) subsections (1)(d), (5) and (6) (conditions for transfer of
personal data originally made available by a member
State);
(b) section 78 (subsequent transfers).” 20
(8) In section 79 (national security: certificate)—
(a) omit subsections (1) to (3),
(b) after subsection (3) insert—
“(3A)
25
Subject to subsection (5), a certificate signed by a Minister of
the Crown certifying that exemption from all or any of the
provisions listed in section 78A(2) is, or at any time was,
required in relation to any personal data for the purposes of
safeguarding national security is conclusive evidence of that
fact.”,
(c) in subsection (4), for “subsection (1)” substitute “subsection (3A)— 30
(a) may identify the personal data to which it applies by
means of a general description, and
(b) ”,
(d) in subsection (5), for “subsection (1)” substitute “subsection (3A)”,
(e) in subsection (7)— 35
(i) for “a restriction falls within a general description in a certificate
issued under subsection (1)” substitute “a certificate under
subsection (3A) which identifies the personal data to which it
40
applies by means of a general description applies to any
personal data”, and
(ii) for “the restriction does not fall within that description”
substitute “the certificate does not apply to the personal data
in question”,
(f) in subsection (8)—
Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill 41
Part 1—Data protection 
(i) for “the restriction” substitute “the certificate”, and
(ii) for “to fall within the general description” substitute “so to
apply”,
(g) in subsection (10), for “subsection (1)” substitute “subsection (3A)”,
(h) in subsection (11), for “subsection (1)” substitute “subsection (3A)”, 5
(i) in subsection (12), for “subsection (1)” substitute “subsection (3A)”,
and
(j) omit subsection (13).
(9) In section 110(2) (intelligence services processing: national security)—
(a) in paragraph (a), after “Chapter 2” insert “of this Part”, 10
(b) in paragraph (b), after “Chapter 3” insert “of this Part”, and
(c) in paragraph (c), after “Chapter 4” insert “of this Part.
(10) In section 186(3) (data subject’s rights etc: exceptions), after paragraph (c)
insert—
“(ca) in Part 3 of this Act, section 78A, and”. 15
(11) In section 40 of the Freedom of Information Act 2000 (personal information)—
(a) in subsection (4A)(b), for “subsection (4) of that section” substitute
“section 45(4) or 78A of that Act”, and
(b)
20
in subsection (5B)(d), for “subsection (4) of that section” substitute
“section 45(4) or 78A of that Act”.
(12) In section 38(3A)(b) of the Freedom of Information (Scotland) Act 2002
(personal information), for “subsection (4) of that section” substitute “section
45(4) or 78A of that Act”.
Intelligence services
25 Joint processing by intelligence services and competent authorities 25
(1) Part 4 of the 2018 Act (intelligence services processing) is amended as follows.
(2) In section 82 (processing to which Part 4 applies)—
(a) before subsection (1) insert—
“(A1) This Part—
(a) applies to processing of personal data by an intelligence 30
service, and
(b) applies to processing of personal data by a qualifying
competent authority where the processing is the subject
35
of a designation notice that is for the time being in force
(see sections 82A to 82E).”,
(b) in subsection (1)—
(i) after “applies” insert “only”,
(ii) in paragraph (a), for “the processing by an intelligence service”
substitute “processing”, and
42 Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill
Part 1—Data protection 
(iii) in paragraph (b), for “the processing by an intelligence service”
substitute “processing”,
(c) after subsection (2) insert—
“(2A) In this Part—
“competent authority” has the same meaning as in Part 5
3;
“qualifying competent authority” means a competent
authority specified or described in regulations made by
the Secretary of State.”, and
(d) after subsection (3) insert— 10
“(4) Regulations under this section are subject to the affirmative
resolution procedure.”
(3) After section 82 insert—
“82A Designation of processing by a qualifying competent authority
(1) For the purposes of this Part, the Secretary of State may give a notice 15
designating processing of personal data by a qualifying competent
authority (a “designation notice”) where—
(a) an application for designation of the processing is made in
accordance with this section, and
(b) the Secretary of State considers that designation of the 20
processing is required for the purposes of safeguarding national
security.
(2) The Secretary of State may only designate processing by a qualifying
25
competent authority that is carried out by the authority as a joint
controller with at least one intelligence service.
(3) The Secretary of State may not designate processing by a qualifying
competent authority that consists of the transfer of personal data to—
(a) a country or territory outside the United Kingdom, or
(b) an international organisation.
(4) A designation notice must— 30
(a) specify or describe the processing and qualifying competent
authority that are designated, and
(b) be given to the applicants for the designation (and see also
section 82D).
(5) An application for designation of processing of personal data by a 35
qualifying competent authority must be made jointly by—
(a) the qualifying competent authority, and
(b) the intelligence service with which the processing is to be
carried out.
(6) An application may be made in respect of more than one qualifying 40
competent authority and in respect of processing with more than one
intelligence service.
Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill 43
Part 1—Data protection 
(7) The application must—
(a) describe the processing, including the intended purposes and
means of processing, and
(b)
5
explain why the applicants consider that designation is required
for the purposes of safeguarding national security.
(8) Before giving a designation notice, the Secretary of State must consult
the Commissioner.
(9) In this section, “joint controller”, in relation to processing of personal
10
data, means a controller whose responsibilities for compliance with
this Part in relation to the processing are determined in an arrangement
under section 104.
82B Duration of designation notice
(1) A designation notice must state when it comes into force.
(2)
15
A designation notice ceases to be in force at the earliest of the following
times—
(a) at the end of the period of 5 years beginning with the day on
which it comes into force;
(b) (if relevant) at the end of a shorter period specified in the
notice;
(c) when the notice is withdrawn under section 82C. 20
(3) The Secretary of State may give a further designation notice in respect
of processing that is, or has been, the subject of a previous designation
notice.
82C Review and withdrawal of designation notice
(1) Subsections (2) to (4) apply where processing is the subject of a 25
designation notice for the time being in force.
(2) A person who applied for the designation of the processing must
notify the Secretary of State without undue delay if the person
30
considers that the designation is no longer required for the purposes
of safeguarding national security.
(3) A person who applied for the designation of the processing must, on
a request from the Secretary of State, provide—
(a) a description of the processing that is being, or is intended to
be, carried out in reliance on the notice, and
(b) an explanation of why the person considers that designation 35
of the processing continues to be required for the purposes of
safeguarding national security.
(4) The Secretary of State must at least annually—
(a)
40
review each designation notice that is for the time being in
force, and
44 Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill
Part 1—Data protection 
(b) consider whether designation of the processing which is the
subject of the notice continues to be required for the purposes
of safeguarding national security.
(5) The Secretary of State—
(a) may withdraw a designation notice by giving a further notice 5
(a “withdrawal notice”) to the persons who applied for the
designation, and
(b) must give a withdrawal notice if the Secretary of State considers
10
that designation of some or all of the processing to which the
notice applies is no longer required for the purposes of
safeguarding national security (whether as a result of a review
required under subsection (4) or otherwise).
(6) A withdrawal notice must—
(a) withdraw the designation notice completely, and
(b) state when it comes into force. 15
(7) In determining when a withdrawal notice required under subsection
(5)(b) comes into force, the Secretary of State must consider—
(a) the desirability of the processing ceasing to be designated as
soon as possible, and
(b) where relevant, the time needed to effect an orderly transition 20
to new arrangements for the processing of personal data.
82D Records of designation notices
(1) Where the Secretary of State gives a designation notice—
(a)
25
the Secretary of State must send a copy of the notice to the
Commissioner, and
(b) the Commissioner must publish a record of the notice.
(2) The record must contain—
(a) the Secretary of State’s name,
(b) the date on which the notice was given,
(c) the date on which the notice ceases to have effect (if not 30
previously withdrawn), and
(d) subject to subsection (3), the rest of the text of the notice.
(3) The Commissioner must not publish the text, or a part of the text, of
the notice if—
(a) the Secretary of State determines that publishing the text or 35
that part of the text—
(i) would be against the interests of national security,
(ii) would be contrary to the public interest, or
(iii) might jeopardise the safety of any person, and
(b) the Secretary of State has notified the Commissioner of that 40
determination.
Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill 45
Part 1—Data protection 
(4) The Commissioner must keep the record of the notice available to the
public while the notice is in force.
(5) Where the Secretary of State gives a withdrawal notice, the Secretary
of State must send a copy of the notice to the Commissioner.
82E Appeal against designation notice 5
(1) A person directly affected by a designation notice may appeal to the
Tribunal against the notice.
(2) If, on an appeal under this section, the Tribunal finds that, applying
10
the principles applied by a court on an application for judicial review,
the Secretary of State did not have reasonable grounds for giving the
notice, the Tribunal may—
(a) allow the appeal, and
(b) quash the notice.”
26 Joint processing: consequential amendments
(1) The 2018 Act is amended as follows. 15
(2) In section 1(5) (overview: Part 4), at the end insert “(and certain processing
carried out by competent authorities jointly with the intelligence services)”.
(3) In section 29 (processing to which Part 3 applies), after subsection (1) insert—
“(1A)
20
This Part does not apply to processing to which Part 4 applies by
virtue of a designation notice (see section 82A).”
(4) In section 83 (meaning of “controller” and “processor” in Part 4)—
(a) before subsection (1) insert—
“(A1) For the purposes of this Part—
(a)
25
an intelligence service is the “controller” in relation to
the processing of personal data if it satisfies subsection
(1) alone or jointly with others, and
(b) a qualifying competent authority is the “controller” in
relation to the processing of personal data that is the
30
subject of a designation notice that is for the time being
in force if the authority satisfies subsection (1) jointly
with others.”,
(b) in subsection (1), for the words before paragraph (a) substitute “This
subsection is satisfied by a person who—”, and
(c)
35
in subsection (2), for “intelligence service on which” substitute “person
on whom”.
(5) In section 84 (other definitions)—
(a) after subsection (2) insert—
“(2A) “Designation notice” has the meaning given in section 82A.”,
and
46 Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill
Part 1—Data protection 
(b) after subsection (6) insert—
“(6A) “Withdrawal notice” has the meaning given in section 82C.”
(6) In section 104(1) (joint controllers), for “intelligence services” substitute
“controllers”.
(7) In section 202(1)(a)(i) (proceedings in the First-tier Tribunal: contempt) after 5
“79,” insert “82E,”.
(8) In section 203(1) (Tribunal Procedure Rules), after “79,” insert “82E,”.
(9) In section 206 (index of defined expressions), in the Table—
(a) in the entry for “competent authority”—
(i) for “Part 3” substitute “Parts 3 and 4”, and 10
(ii) for “section 30” substitute “sections 30 and 82”, and
(b) at the appropriate places insert—
“designation notice (in Part 4) section 84”;
section 82”;
15
“qualifying competent authority (in Part
4)
“withdrawal notice (in Part 4) section 84”.
Information Commissioner’s role
27 Duties of the Commissioner in carrying out functions
(1) The 2018 Act is amended as follows.
(2) Omit section 2(2) (duty of Commissioner when carrying out functions). 20
(3) After section 120 insert—
“Duties in carrying out functions
120A Principal objective
25
It is the principal objective of the Commissioner, in carrying out
functions under the data protection legislation—
(a) to secure an appropriate level of protection for personal data,
having regard to the interests of data subjects, controllers and
others and matters of general public interest, and
(b)
30
to promote public trust and confidence in the processing of
personal data.
Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill 47
Part 1—Data protection 
120B Duties in relation to functions under the data protection legislation
In carrying out functions under the data protection legislation, the
Commissioner must have regard to such of the following as appear
to the Commissioner to be relevant in the circumstances—
(a) the desirability of promoting innovation; 5
(b) the desirability of promoting competition;
(c) the importance of the prevention, investigation, detection and
prosecution of criminal offences;
(d) the need to safeguard public security and national security.
120C Strategy 10
(1) The Commissioner must prepare a strategy for carrying out the
Commissioner’s functions under the data protection legislation in
accordance with the Commissioner’s duties under—
(a) sections 120A and 120B,
(b) section 108 of the Deregulation Act 2015 (exercise of regulatory 15
functions: economic growth), and
(c) section 21 of the Legislative and Regulatory Reform Act 2006
(exercise of regulatory functions: principles).
(2) The Commissioner must—
(a) review the strategy from time to time, and 20
(b) revise the strategy as appropriate.
(3) The Commissioner must publish the strategy and any revised strategy.
120D Duty to consult other regulators
(1)
25
The Commissioner must, at such times as the Commissioner considers
appropriate, consult the persons mentioned in subsection (2) about
how the manner in which the Commissioner exercises functions under
the data protection legislation may affect economic growth, innovation
and competition.
(2) The persons are—
(a) such persons exercising regulatory functions as the 30
Commissioner considers appropriate;
(b) such other persons as the Commissioner considers appropriate.
(3) In this section, “regulatory function” has the meaning given by section
111 of the Deregulation Act 2015.”
(4) In section 139 (reporting to Parliament), after subsection (1) insert— 35
“(1A) In connection with the Commissioner’s functions under the data
protection legislation, the report must contain (among other things)—
(a) a review of what the Commissioner has done during the
reporting period to comply with the duties under—
48 Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill
Part 1—Data protection 
(i) sections 120A and 120B,
(ii) section 108 of the Deregulation Act 2015, and
(iii) section 21 of the Legislative and Regulatory Reform Act
2006,
including a review of the operation of the strategy prepared 5
and published under section 120C;
(b) a review of what the Commissioner has done during the
reporting period to comply with the duty under section 120D.
(1B)
10
In subsection (1A), “the reporting period” means the period to which
the report relates.”
(5) The Commissioner must prepare and publish a strategy in accordance with
section 120C of the 2018 Act before the end of the period of 18 months
beginning with the day on which this section comes into force.
28 Strategic priorities
(1) The 2018 Act is amended as follows. 15
(2) After section 120D (inserted by section 27 of this Act) insert—
“Strategic priorities
120E Designation of statement of strategic priorities
(1)
20
The Secretary of State may designate a statement as the statement of
strategic priorities for the purposes of this Part if the requirements set
out in section 120H are satisfied.
(2) The statement of strategic priorities is a statement prepared by the
Secretary of State that sets out the strategic priorities of His Majesty’s
government relating to data protection.
(3) The Secretary of State must publish the statement of strategic priorities 25
(including any amended statement following a review under section
120G) in whatever manner the Secretary of State considers appropriate.
(4) In this Part, “the statement of strategic priorities” means the statement
for the time being designated under subsection (1).
120F Duties of the Commissioner in relation to strategic priorities 30
(1) The Commissioner must have regard to the statement of strategic
priorities when carrying out functions under the data protection
legislation.
(2)
35
But the duty in subsection (1) does not apply when the Commissioner
is carrying out functions in relation to a particular person, case or
investigation.
Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill 49
Part 1—Data protection 
(3) Where the Secretary of State designates a statement as the statement
of strategic priorities (including any amended statement following a
review under section 120G), the Commissioner must—
(a)
5
explain in writing how the Commissioner will have regard to
the statement when carrying out functions under the data
protection legislation, and
(b) publish a copy of that explanation.
(4) The duty in subsection (3) must be complied with—
(a)
10
within the period of 40 days beginning with the day of the
designation, or
(b) within whatever longer period the Secretary of State may allow.
(5) In calculating the period of 40 days mentioned in subsection (4)(a),
no account is to be taken of—
(a) Saturdays or Sundays,
(b) Christmas Day or Good Friday, or 15
(c) a day which is a bank holiday under the Banking and Financial
Dealings Act 1971 in any part of the United Kingdom.
(6) For a further duty of the Commissioner in relation to the statement
of strategic priorities, see section 139(1A)(c).
120G Review of designated statement 20
(1) The Secretary of State must review the statement of strategic priorities
if a period of 3 years has elapsed since the relevant time.
(2) The “relevant time”, in relation to the statement of strategic priorities,
means—
(a) the time when the statement was first designated under section 25
120E, or
(b) if later, the time when a review of the statement under this
section last took place.
(3)
30
A review under subsection (1) must take place as soon as reasonably
practicable after the end of the 3 year period.
(4) The Secretary of State may review the statement of strategic priorities
at any other time if—
(a) a Parliamentary general election has taken place since the
relevant time,
(b) a significant change in the policy of His Majesty’s government 35
relating to data protection has occurred since the relevant time,
or
(c) the Parliamentary requirement in relation to an amended
statement was not met on the last review (see subsection (12)).
(5) For the purposes of subsection (4)(b), a significant change in the policy 40
of the government relating to data protection has occurred only if—
50 Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill
Part 1—Data protection 
(a) the change was not anticipated by the Secretary of State at the
relevant time, and
(b) if the change had been so anticipated, it appears to the Secretary
5
of State likely that the statement would have been different in
a material way.
(6) On a review under this section, the Secretary of State may—
(a) amend the statement (including by replacing the whole or part
of the statement with new content),
(b) leave the statement as it is, or
(c) withdraw the statement’s designation as the statement of 10
strategic priorities.
(7) A statement amended under subsection (6)(a) has effect only if the
Secretary of State designates the amended statement as the statement
15
of strategic priorities statement under section 120E (and the
requirements set out in section 120H apply in relation to any such
designation).
(8) Where the designation of a statement is withdrawn under subsection
(6)(c), the Secretary of State must publish notice of the withdrawal in
whatever manner the Secretary of State considers appropriate.
(9) For the purposes of this section, corrections of clerical or typographical 20
errors are not to be treated as amendments of the statement.
(10) The designation of a statement as the statement of strategic priorities
ceases to have effect upon a subsequent designation of an amended
25
statement as the statement of strategic priorities in accordance with
subsection (7).
(11) For the purposes of subsection (2)(b), a review of a statement takes
place—
(a) in the case of a decision on the review to amend the statement
under subsection (6)(a)—
(i) at the time when the amended statement is designated 30
as the statement of strategic priorities under section
120E, or
(ii) if the amended statement is not so designated, at the
35
time when the amended statement was laid before
Parliament under section 120H(1);
(b) in the case of a decision on the review to leave the statement
as it is under subsection (6)(b), at the time when that decision
is taken.
(12)
40
For the purposes of subsection (4)(c), the Parliamentary requirement
in relation to an amended statement was not met on the last review
if—
(a) on the last review of the statement of strategic priorities to be
held under this section, an amended statement was laid before
Parliament under section 120H(1), but
Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill 51
Part 1—Data protection 
(b) the amended statement was not designated because within the
period mentioned in section 120H(2) either House of Parliament
resolved not to approve it.
120H Parliamentary procedure
(1) Before the Secretary of State designates a statement as the statement 5
of strategic priorities, the Secretary of State must lay the statement
before Parliament.
(2) The Secretary of State must then wait until the end of the 40-day
10
period and may not designate the statement if, within that period,
either House of Parliament resolves not to approve it.
(3) “The 40-day period” means—
(a) if the statement is laid before both Houses of Parliament on
the same day, the period of 40 days beginning with that day,
or
(b) if the statement is laid before the Houses of Parliament on 15
different days, the period of 40 days beginning with the later
of those days.
(4) In calculating the 40-day period, no account is to be taken of any
20
whole days that fall within a period during which Parliament is
dissolved or prorogued or during which both Houses are adjourned
for more than 4 days.”
(3) In section 139 (reporting to Parliament), in subsection (1A) (inserted by section
27 of this Act), at the end insert—
“(c)
25
a review of how the Commissioner has had regard to the
statement of strategic priorities during the reporting period.”
(4) In the Table in section 206 (index of defined expressions), at the appropriate
place insert—
“statement of strategic priorities (in Part 5) section 120E”.
29 Codes of practice for the processing of personal data
(1) The 2018 Act is amended in accordance with subsections (2) to (6). 30
(2) After section 124 insert—
“124A Other codes of practice
(1) The Commissioner must prepare appropriate codes of practice giving
35
guidance as to good practice in the processing of personal data if
required to do so by regulations made by the Secretary of State.
(2) Regulations under this section—
52 Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill
Part 1—Data protection 
(a) must describe the personal data or processing to which the
code of practice is to relate, and
(b) may describe the persons or classes of person to whom it is to
relate.
(3) Where a code under this section is in force, the Commissioner may 5
prepare amendments of the code or a replacement code.
(4) Before preparing a code or amendments under this section, the
Commissioner must consult the Secretary of State and such of the
following as the Commissioner considers appropriate—
(a) trade associations; 10
(b) data subjects;
(c) persons who appear to the Commissioner to represent the
interests of data subjects.
(5) A code under this section may include transitional provision or savings.
(6) Regulations under this section are subject to the negative resolution 15
procedure.
(7) In this section—
“good practice in the processing of personal data” means such
20
practice in the processing of personal data as appears to the
Commissioner to be desirable having regard to the interests of
data subjects and others, including compliance with the
requirements of the data protection legislation;
“trade association” includes a body representing controllers or
processors.”
(3) In section 125 (approval of codes prepared under sections 121 to 124)— 25
(a) in the heading, for “124” substitute “124A”,
(b) for subsection (5) substitute—
“(5) If the Commissioner is prevented by subsection (3) from issuing
30
a code that is not a replacement code, the Commissioner must
prepare another version of the code.”, and
(c) in subsection (9), for “or 124” substitute “, 124 or 124A”.
(4) In section 126 (publication and review of codes issued under section 125(4)),
in subsection (4), for “or 124(2)” substitute “, 124A(2) or 124A(3)”.
(5) Omit section 128 (other codes of practice).
(6) In section 129 (consensual audits), in subsection (3), for “128” substitute “124A”. 35
(7) In section 19AC of the Registration Service Act 1953 (code of practice), in
subsection (11), for “128” substitute “124A”.
(8) In the Statistics and Registration Service Act 2007—
(a)
40
in section 45 (information held by HMRC), in subsection (4A), for
“128” substitute “124A”,
Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill 53
Part 1—Data protection 
(b) in section 45A (information held by other public authorities), in
subsection (8), for “128” substitute “124A”,
(c) in section 45E (further provisions about powers in sections 45B, 45C
and 45D), in subsection (16), for “128” substitute “124A”, and
(d) in section 53A (disclosure by the Board to devolved administrations), 5
in subsection (9), for “128” substitute “124A”.
(9) In the Digital Economy Act 2017—
(a) in section 43 (code of practice), in subsection (13), for “128” substitute
“124A”,
(b) in section 52 (code of practice), in subsection (13), for “128” substitute 10
“124A”,
(c) in section 60 (code of practice), in subsection (13), for “128” substitute
“124A”, and
(d)
15
in section 70 (code of practice), in subsection (15), for “128” substitute
“124A”.
30 Codes of practice: panels and impact assessments
(1) The 2018 Act is amended as follows.
(2) After section 124A (inserted by section 29 of this Act) insert—
“124B Panels to consider codes of practice
(1) This section applies where a code is prepared under section 121, 122, 20
123, 124 or 124A, subject to subsection (11).
(2) The Commissioner must establish a panel of individuals to consider
the code.
(3) The panel must consist of—
(a) individuals the Commissioner considers have expertise in the 25
subject matter of the code, and
(b) individuals the Commissioner considers—
(i) are likely to be affected by the code, or
(ii) represent persons likely to be affected by the code.
(4) Before the panel begins to consider the code, the Commissioner must— 30
(a) publish the code in draft, and
(b) publish a statement that—
(i) states that a panel has been establish to consider the
code,
(ii) identifies the members of the panel, 35
(iii) explains the process by which they were selected, and
(iv) explains the reasons for their selection.
(5) Where at any time it appears to the Commissioner that a member of
the panel is not willing or able to serve as a member of the panel, the
54 Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill
Part 1—Data protection 
Commissioner may select another individual to be a member of the
panel.
(6) Where the Commissioner selects an individual to be a member of the
5
panel under subsection (5), the Commissioner must publish a statement
that—
(a) identifies the member of the panel,
(b) explains the process by which the member was selected, and
(c) explains the reasons for the member’s selection.
(7) The Commissioner must make arrangements—
(a) for the members of the panel to consider the code with one 10
another (whether in person or otherwise), and
(b) for the panel to prepare and submit to the Commissioner a
report on the code within such reasonable period as is
determined by the Commissioner.
(8) If the panel submits to the Commissioner a report on the code within 15
the period determined by the Commissioner, the Commissioner must
as soon as reasonably practicable—
(a) make any alterations to the code that the Commissioner
considers appropriate in the light of the report, and
(b) publish— 20
(i) the code in draft,
(ii) the report or a summary of it, and
(iii) in a case where a recommendation in the report to alter
25
the code has not been accepted by the Commissioner,
an explanation of why it has not been accepted.
(9) The Commissioner may pay remuneration and expenses to the
members of the panel.
(10) This section applies in relation to amendments prepared under section
30
121, 122, 123, 124 or 124A as it applies in relation to codes prepared
under those sections, subject to subsection (11).
(11) The Secretary of State may by regulations provide that this section
does not apply, or applies with modifications, in the case of a code
or amendments of a code that—
(a) is prepared under section 124A, and
(b) is specified in the regulations. 35
(12) Regulations under this section are subject to the negative resolution
procedure.
124C Impact assessments for codes of practice
(1)
40
Where a code is prepared under section 121, 122, 123, 124 or 124A,
the Commissioner must carry out and publish an assessment of—
(a) who would be likely to be affected by the code, and
Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill 55
Part 1—Data protection 
(b) the effect the code would be likely to have on them.
(2) This section applies in relation to amendments prepared under section
121, 122, 123, 124 or 124A as it applies in relation to codes prepared
under those sections.”
31 Codes of practice: approval by the Secretary of State 5
(1) The 2018 Act is amended as follows.
(2) After section 124C (inserted by section 30 of this Act) insert—
“124D Approval by Secretary of State of codes of practice
(1)
10
Where a code is prepared under section 121, 122, 123, 124 or 124A,
the Commissioner must submit the final version to the Secretary of
State.
(2) Within the period of 40 days beginning with the day on which the
code is submitted to the Secretary of State, the Secretary of State must
decide whether to approve the code.
(3) If the Secretary of State approves the code, the Secretary of State must 15
lay the code before Parliament.
(4) If the Secretary of State does not approve the code, the Secretary of
State must—
(a) give a statement to the Commissioner that—
(i) states that the Secretary of State does not approve the 20
code, and
(ii) explains the reasons why the Secretary of State does
not approve the code, and
(b) publish the statement.
(5) If the Secretary of State does not approve the code, the Commissioner 25
must—
(a) revise the code in the light of the statement given by the
Secretary of State, and
(b) submit the revised code to the Secretary of State.
(6) If the Commissioner submits a revised code to the Secretary of State, 30
subsections (2) to (5) and this subsection apply again.
(7) This section applies in relation to amendments prepared under section
121, 122, 123, 124 or 124A as it applies in relation to codes prepared
under those sections.
(8) In calculating the period of 40 days mentioned in subsection (2), no 35
account is to be taken of—
(a) Saturdays or Sundays,
(b) Christmas Day or Good Friday, or
56 Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill
Part 1—Data protection 
(c) a day which is a bank holiday under the Banking and Financial
Dealings Act 1971 in any part of the United Kingdom.”
(3) In section 125 (approval of codes prepared under sections 121 to 124)—
(a) in the heading, after “Approval” insert “by Parliament”,
(b) for subsections (1) and (2) substitute— 5
“(1) This section applies where a code is laid before Parliament
under section 124D.”,
(c) in subsection (3), for “a code prepared under section 121, 122, 123 or
124” substitute “the code”, and
(d) in subsection (9), for “subsections (2) and (5)” substitute “subsection 10
(5)”.
32 Vexatious or excessive requests made to the Commissioner
(1) The 2018 Act is amended in accordance with subsections (2) and (3).
(2)
15
In section 135 (manifestly unfounded or excessive requests made to the
Commissioner)—
(a) in the heading, for “Manifestly unfounded” substitute “Vexatious”,
(b) in subsection (1)—
(i) for “manifestly unfounded” substitute “vexatious”, and
(ii) after “excessive” insert “(see section 204A)”,
(c) omit subsection (2), 20
(d) in subsection (3), for “manifestly unfounded” substitute “vexatious”,
(e) omit subsection (4), and
(f) after that subsection insert—
“(5)
25
Article 57(3) of the UK GDPR (performance of Information
Commissioner’s tasks generally to be free of charge for data
subject) has effect subject to this section.”
(3) In section 136(1) (guidance about fees), omit paragraph (b) (and the “or”
before it).
(4)
30
In Article 57 of the UK GDPR (Information Commissioner’s tasks), omit
paragraph 4.
33 Analysis of performance
In the 2018 Act, after section 139 insert—
“139A Analysis of performance
(1)
35
The Commissioner must prepare and publish an analysis of the
Commissioner’s performance using key performance indicators.
(2) The analysis must be prepared and published at least annually.
Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill 57
Part 1—Data protection 
(3) In this section, “key performance indicators” means factors by reference
to which the Commissioner’s performance can be measured most
effectively.
Documents and notices”.
Enforcement 5
34 Power of the Commissioner to require documents
(1) The 2018 Act is amended as follows.
(2) In section 142 (information notices)—
(a) in subsection (1)—
(i) in paragraph (a), after “information” insert “or documents”, 10
and
(ii) in paragraph (b), after “information” insert “or documents”,
(b) in subsection (2)(b), after “information” insert “or documents”,
(c) in subsection (3)—
(i) in paragraph (a), after “information”, in both places it occurs, 15
insert “or documents”,
(ii) in paragraph (b), after “information” insert “or documents”,
(iii) in paragraph (c), after “information” insert “or documents”,
and
(iv) in paragraph (d), after “information” insert “or documents”, 20
(d) in subsection (5), after “information”, in the second place it occurs,
insert “or documents”,
(e) in subsection (6), after “information”, in the second place it occurs,
insert “or documents”, and
(f) in subsection (7)— 25
(i) in paragraph (a), for “is” substitute “or documents are”, and
(ii) in the words after paragraph (b), after “information” insert “or
documents”.
(3) In section 143 (information notices: restrictions)—
(a) in subsection (1)(b)(ii), for “is” substitute “or documents are”, 30
(b) in subsection (2), after “information”, in the second place it occurs,
insert “or documents”,
(c) in subsection (3), for “in respect” substitute “or documents to the extent
that requiring the person to do so would result in the disclosure”,
(d) in subsection (4), for “in respect” substitute “or documents to the extent 35
that requiring the person to do so would result in the disclosure”, and
(e) in subsection (6), after “information”, in the second place it occurs,
insert “or documents”.
(4) In section 145 (information orders)—
(a) in subsection (2)— 40
58 Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill
Part 1—Data protection 
(i) in paragraph (a), after “information”, in the first place it occurs,
insert “or documents”, and
(ii) in paragraph (b), after “information” insert “or documents”,
and
(b) in subsection (3)— 5
(i) in paragraph (a), after “information” insert “or documents”,
(ii) in paragraph (b), after “information” insert “or documents”,
and
(iii) in paragraph (c), after “information” insert “or documents”.
(5) In section 148(1) (destroying or falsifying information and documents etc), in 10
paragraph (a), after “information”, in the second place it occurs, insert “or a
document”.
(6) In section 160 (guidance about regulatory action), in subsection (3)(a), for “is”
substitute “or documents are”.
(7) In Schedule 17 (review of processing of personal data for the purposes of 15
journalism), in paragraph 2(2) (information notices)—
(a) in paragraph (a), for “is” substitute “or documents are”, and
(b) in the words after paragraph (b), after “information” insert “or
documents”.
35 Power of the Commissioner to require a report 20
(1) The 2018 Act is amended as follows.
(2) In section 146 (assessment notices)—
(a) in subsection (2), after paragraph (i), insert—
“(j)
25
make arrangements for an approved person to prepare
a report on a specified matter;
(k) provide to the Commissioner a report prepared in
pursuance of such arrangements.”
(b) after subsection (3) insert—
“(3A)
30
An assessment notice that requires a controller or processor to
make arrangements for an approved person to prepare a report
may require the arrangements to include specified terms as
to—
(a) the preparation of the report;
(b) the contents of the report;
(c) the form in which the report is to be provided; 35
(d) the date by which the report is to be completed.”
(c) after subsection (11) insert—
“(11A) Where the Commissioner gives an assessment notice that
40
requires the controller or processor to make arrangements for
an approved person to prepare a report, the controller or
Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill 59
Part 1—Data protection 
processor is liable for the payment of the approved person’s
remuneration and expenses under the arrangements.”
(d) in subsection (12), before the definition of “domestic premises” insert—
5
““approved person”, in relation to a report, means a person
approved to prepare the report in accordance with section
146A;”.
(3) After section 146 insert—
“146A Assessment notices: approval of person to prepare report etc
(1)
10
This section applies where an assessment notice requires a controller
or processor to make arrangements for an approved person to prepare
a report.
(2) The controller or processor must, within such period as is specified
in the assessment notice, nominate to the Commissioner a person to
prepare the report.
(3) If the Commissioner is satisfied that the nominated person is a suitable 15
person to prepare the report, the Commissioner must by written notice
to the controller or processor approve the nominated person to prepare
the report.
(4)
20
If the Commissioner is not satisfied that the nominated person is a
suitable person to prepare the report, the Commissioner must by
written notice to the controller or processor—
(a) inform the controller or processor that the Commissioner has
decided not to approve the nominated person to prepare the
report,
(b) inform the controller or processor of the reasons for that 25
decision, and
(c) approve a person who the Commissioner is satisfied is a
suitable person to prepare the report to do so.
(5)
30
If the controller or processor does not nominate a person within the
period specified in the assessment notice, the Commissioner must by
written notice to the controller or processor approve a person who
the Commissioner is satisfied is a suitable person to prepare the report
to do so.
(6)
35
It is the duty of the controller or processor to give the person approved
to prepare the report all such assistance as the person may reasonably
require to prepare the report.”
(4) In section 155 (penalty notices), in subsection (1)—
(a) omit “or” at the end of paragraph (a), and
(b) at the end of paragraph (b) insert “, or
(c) has failed to comply with a duty imposed on the person 40
by section 146A(6).”
60 Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill
Part 1—Data protection 
(5) In section 160 (guidance about regulatory action), in subsection (4)—
(a) after paragraph (a) insert—
“(aa) provision specifying factors to be considered in
5
determining whether to give an assessment notice to a
person that imposes a requirement of a sort mentioned
in section 146(2)(j);
(ab) provision about the factors the Commissioner may take
into account when determining the suitability of a
10
person to prepare a report of a sort mentioned in section
146(2)(j);”.
36 Interview notices
(1) The 2018 Act is amended as follows.
(2) After section 148 insert—
“Interview notices
148A Interview notices 15
(1) This section applies where the Commissioner suspects that a controller
or processor—
(a) has failed or is failing as described in section 149(2), or
(b) has committed or is committing an offence under this Act.
(2) For the purpose of investigating the suspected failure or offence, the 20
Commissioner may, by written notice (an “interview notice”), require
an individual within subsection (3) to—
(a) attend at a place specified in the notice, and
(b)
25
answer questions with respect to any matter relevant to the
investigation.
(3) An individual is within this subsection if the individual—
(a) is the controller or processor,
(b) is or was at any time employed by, or otherwise working for,
the controller or processor, or
(c) is or was at any time concerned in the management or control 30
of the controller or processor.
(4) An interview notice must specify the time at which the individual
must attend at the specified place and answer questions (but see the
restrictions in subsections (6) and (7)).
(5) An interview notice must— 35
(a) indicate the nature of the suspected failure or offence that is
the subject of the investigation,
(b) provide information about the consequences of failure to
comply with the notice, and
Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill 61
Part 1—Data protection 
(c) provide information about the rights under sections 162 and
164 (appeals etc).
(6) An interview notice may not require an individual to attend at the
5
specified place and answer questions before the end of the period
within which an appeal can be brought against the notice.
(7) If an appeal is brought against an interview notice, the individual to
whom the notice is given need not attend at the specified place and
answer questions pending the determination or withdrawal of the
appeal.
(8) If an interview notice— 10
(a) states that, in the Commissioner’s opinion, it is necessary for
the individual to attend at the specified place and answer
questions urgently, and
(b) gives the Commissioner’s reasons for reaching that opinion,
subsections (6) and (7) do not apply but the notice must not require 15
the individual to attend at the specified place and answer questions
before the end of the period of 24 hours beginning when the notice
is given.
(9)
20
The Commissioner may cancel or vary an interview notice by written
notice to the individual to whom it was given.
148B Interview notices: restrictions
(1) An interview notice does not require an individual to answer questions
to the extent that requiring the person to do so would involve an
infringement of the privileges of either House of Parliament.
(2) An interview notice does not require an individual to answer questions 25
in respect of a communication which is made—
(a) between a professional legal adviser and the adviser’s client,
and
(b)
30
in connection with the giving of legal advice to the client with
respect of obligations, liabilities or rights under the data
protection legislation.
(3) An interview notice does not require an individual to answer questions
in respect of a communication which is made—
(a)
35
between a professional legal adviser and the adviser’s client
or between such an adviser or client and another person,
(b) in connection with or in contemplation of proceedings under
or arising out of the data protection legislation, and
(c) for the purposes of such proceedings.
(4)
40
In subsections (2) and (3), references to the client of a professional
legal adviser include references to a person acting on behalf of the
client.
62 Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill
Part 1—Data protection 
(5) An interview notice does not require an individual to answer questions
if doing so would, by revealing evidence of the commission of an
offence, expose the individual to proceedings for that offence.
(6)
5
The reference to an offence in subsection (5) does not include an offence
under—
(a) this Act;
(b) section 5 of the Perjury Act 1911 (false statements made
otherwise than on oath);
(c)
10
section 44(2) of the Criminal Law (Consolidation) (Scotland)
Act 1995 (false statements made otherwise than on oath);
(d) Article 10 of the Perjury (Northern Ireland) Order 1979 (S.I.
1979/1714 (N.I. 19)) (false statutory declarations and other false
unsworn statements).
(7)
15
A statement made by an individual in response to an interview notice
may not be used in evidence against that individual on a prosecution
for an offence under this Act (other than an offence under section
148C) unless in the proceedings—
(a) in giving evidence the individual provides information
inconsistent with the statement, and
(b) evidence relating to the statement is adduced, or a question 20
relating to it is asked, by that individual or on that individual’s
behalf.
(8) The Commissioner may not give an interview notice with respect to
the processing of personal data for the special purposes.
(9) The Commissioner may not give an interview notice to an individual 25
for the purpose of investigating a suspected failure or offence if the
controller or processor suspected of the failure or offence is—
(a) a body specified in section 23(3) of the Freedom of Information
Act 2000 (bodies dealing with security matters), or
(b) the Office for Standards in Education, Children’s Services and 30
Skills in so far as it is a controller or processor in respect of
information processed for the purposes of functions exercisable
by His Majesty’s Chief Inspector of Education, Children’s
35
Services and Skills by virtue of section 5(1)(a) of the Care
Standards Act 2000.
148C False statements made in response to interview notices
It is an offence for an individual, in response to an interview notice—
(a) to make a statement which the individual knows to be false in
a material respect, or
(b) recklessly to make a statement which is false in a material 40
respect.”
(3) In section 149 (enforcement notices), in subsection (9)(b)—
(a) after “an assessment notice” insert “, an interview notice”, and
Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill 63
Part 1—Data protection 
(b) after “147” insert “, 148A, 148B”.
(4) In section 155 (penalty notices), in subsection (1)(b), after “assessment notice”
insert “, an interview notice”.
(5)
5
In section 157 (maximum amount of penalty), in subsection (4), after
“assessment notice” insert “, an interview notice”.
(6) In section 160 (guidance about regulatory action)—
(a) in subsection (1), after paragraph (b) insert—
“(ba) interview notices,”, and
(b) after subsection (5) insert—
“(5A) In relation to interview notices, the guidance must include— 10
(a) provision specifying factors to be considered in
determining whether to give an interview notice to an
individual;
(b)
15
provision about the circumstances in which the
Commissioner would consider it appropriate to give an
interview notice to an individual in reliance on section
148A(8) (urgent cases);
(c) provision about the circumstances in which the
20
Commissioner would consider it appropriate to vary
the place or time specified in an interview notice at the
request of the individual to whom the notice is given;
(d) provision about the nature of interviews carried out in
accordance with an interview notice;
(e)
25
provision about how the Commissioner will determine
how to proceed if an individual does not comply with
an interview notice.”
(7) In section 162 (rights of appeal), in subsection (1), after paragraph (b) insert—
“(ba) an interview notice;”.
(8) In section 164 (applications in respect of urgent notices)—
(a) in subsection (1), after “assessment notice” insert “, an interview notice”, 30
and
(b) in subsection (5), after paragraph (b) (but before the “and” after it)
insert—
“(ba)
35
in relation to an interview notice, a statement under
section 148A(8)(a),”.
(9) In section 181 (interpretation of Part 6), at the appropriate place, insert—
““interview notice” has the meaning given in section 148A;”.
(10) In section 196 (penalties for offences), in subsection (2), after “148,” insert
“148C,”.
(11) In section 206 (index of defined expressions), at the appropriate place, insert— 40
64 Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill
Part 1—Data protection 
“interview notice (in Part 6) section 181”.
(12) In Schedule 17 (review of processing of personal data for the purposes of
journalism)—
(a) after paragraph 3 insert—
“Interview notices 5
3A (1) Sub-paragraph (2) applies where the Commissioner gives an
interview notice to an individual during a relevant period.
(2) If the interview notice—
(a)
10
states that, in the Commissioner’s opinion, it is
necessary for the individual to comply with a
requirement in the notice for the purposes of the
relevant review, and
(b) gives the Commissioner’s reasons for reaching that
opinion,
subsections (6) and (7) of section 148A do not apply but the 15
notice must not require the individual to comply with the
requirement before the end of the period of 24 hours
beginning when the notice is given.
(3)
20
During a relevant period, section 148B has effect as if for
subsection (8) there were substituted—
“(8) The Commissioner may not give an individual an
interview notice with respect to the processing of
personal data for the special purposes unless a
25
determination under section 174 with respect to the
data or the processing has taken effect.””, and
(b) in paragraph 4 (applications in respect of urgent notices)—
(i) for “or assessment notice” substitute “, assessment notice or
interview notice”,
(ii) for “or 3(2)(a)” substitute “, 3(2)(a) or 3A(2)(a)”, and
(iii) for “or 146(8)(a)” substitute “, 146(8)(a) or 148A(8)(a)”. 30
37 Penalty notices
(1) The 2018 Act is amended as follows.
(2) In paragraph 2 of Schedule 16 (notice of intent to impose penalty), omit
sub-paragraphs (2) and (3).
(3) In paragraph 4 of that Schedule (giving a penalty notice)— 35
(a) before sub-paragraph (1) insert—
“(A1) This paragraph applies where the Commissioner gives a notice
of intent to a person.
Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill 65
Part 1—Data protection 
(B1) Within the period of 6 months beginning with the day the
notice is given, or as soon as reasonably practicable thereafter,
the Commission must give to the person—
(a) a penalty notice, or
(b) written notice that the Commissioner has decided not 5
to give a penalty notice to the person.”,
(b) in sub-paragraph (1)—
(i) at the beginning, insert “But”, and
(ii) after “penalty notice” insert “to the person”, and
(c) in sub-paragraph (2), for “a person” substitute “the person”. 10
(4) In section 160 (guidance about regulatory action), in subsection (7), after
paragraph (d) insert—
“(e) provision about the circumstances in which the Commissioner
15
would consider it necessary to comply with the duty in
paragraph 4(B1) of Schedule 16 after the period of 6 months
mentioned in that paragraph.”
38 Annual report on regulatory action
(1) The 2018 Act is amended as follows.
(2) In section 139 (reporting to Parliament), before subsection (3) insert—
“(2A) The report under this section may include the annual report under 20
section 161A.”
(3) In the heading before section 160, at the end insert “and report”.
(4) After section 161 insert—
“161A Annual report on regulatory action
(1) The Commissioner must produce and publish an annual report 25
containing the information described in subsections (2) to (5).
(2) The report must include the following information about UK GDPR
investigations—
(a)
30
the number of investigations begun, continued or completed
by the Commissioner during the reporting period,
(b) the different types of act and omission that were the subject
matter of the investigations,
(c) the enforcement powers exercised by the Commissioner in the
reporting period in connection with the investigations,
(d) the duration of investigations that ended in the reporting 35
period, and
(e) the different types of outcome in investigations that ended in
that period.
66 Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill
Part 1—Data protection 
(3) The report must include information about the enforcement powers
exercised by the Commissioner in the reporting period in connection
with—
(a)
5
processing of personal data by a competent authority for any
of the law enforcement purposes, and
(b) processing of personal data to which Part 4 applies.
(4) The information included in the report in accordance with subsections
(2) and (3) must include information about—
(a)
10
the number of penalty notices given in the reporting period
that were given more than 6 months after the notice of intent
was given under paragraph 2 of Schedule 16, and
(b) the reasons why that happened.
(5) The report must include a review of how the Commissioner had regard
15
to the guidance published under section 160 when exercising the
Commissioner’s enforcement powers as described in subsections (2)(c)
and (3).
(6) In this section—
“enforcement powers” means the powers under—
(a)
20
Article 58(1)(c) and (d) and (2)(a) and (b) of the UK
GDPR,
(b) sections 142 to 159 of this Act,
(c) paragraph 2(a), (b) and (c) of Schedule 13 to this Act,
(d) Schedules 15 and 16 to this Act;
25
“the law enforcement purposes” has the meaning given in section
31 of this Act;
“the reporting period” means the period to which the report
relates;
“UK GDPR investigation” means an investigation required under
30
Article 57(1)(h) of the UK GDPR (investigations on the
application of the UK GDPR).”
39 Complaints to controllers
(1) The 2018 Act is amended as follows.
(2) Before section 165 (but after the cross-heading preceding it) insert—
“164A Complaints by data subjects to controllers
(1) A data subject may make a complaint to the controller if the data 35
subject considers that, in connection with personal data relating to the
data subject, there is an infringement of the UK GDPR or Part 3 of
this Act.
(2)
40
A controller must facilitate the making of complaints under this section
by taking steps such as providing a complaint form which can be
completed electronically and by other means.
Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill 67
Part 1—Data protection 
(3) If a controller receives a complaint under this section, the controller
must acknowledge receipt of the complaint within the period of 30
days beginning with the day on which it is received.
(4)
5
If a controller receives a complaint under this section, the controller
must without undue delay—
(a) take appropriate steps to respond to the complaint, and
(b) inform the complainant of the outcome of the complaint.
(5) The reference in subsection (4)(a) to taking appropriate steps to respond
to the complaint includes—
(a) making enquiries into the subject matter of the complaint, to 10
the extent appropriate, and
(b) informing the complainant about progress on the complaint.
164B Controllers to notify the Commissioner of the number of complaints
(1)
15
The Secretary of State may by regulations require a controller to notify
the Commissioner of the number of complaints made to the controller
under section 164A in periods specified or described in the regulations.
(2) Regulations under this section may provide that a controller is required
to make a notification to the Commissioner in respect of a period only
in circumstances specified in the regulations.
(3) Regulations under this section may include— 20
(a) provision about a matter listed in subsection (4), or
(b) provision conferring power on the Commissioner to determine
those matters.
(4) The matters are—
(a) the form and manner in which a notification must be made, 25
(b) the time at which, or period within which, a notification must
be made, and
(c) how the number of complaints made to a controller during a
period is to be calculated.
(5) Regulations under this section are subject to the negative resolution 30
procedure.”
40 Power of the Commissioner to refuse to act on certain complaints
(1) The 2018 Act is amended as follows.
(2) In section 165 (complaints by data subject to the Commissioner)—
(a) omit subsection (1), 35
(b) in subsection (2), after “infringement of” insert “the UK GDPR or”,
and
68 Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill
Part 1—Data protection 
(c) after subsection (5) insert—
“(5A) Subsection (4) does not apply if the Commissioner refuses to
act on the complaint in reliance on section 165A.”
(3) After section 165 insert—
“165A Power of Commissioner to refuse to act on certain complaints 5
(1) The Commissioner may refuse to act on a complaint under section
165 if condition A, B or C is met.
(2) Condition A is that—
(a)
10
the complaint concerns an infringement of the UK GDPR or
Part 3 of this Act, and
(b) the complaint has not been made to the controller under section
164A.
(3) Condition B is that—
(a)
15
the complaint has been made to the controller under section
164A,
(b) the controller has not finished handling the complaint in
accordance with subsection (4) of that section, and
(c) the period of 45 days beginning with the day the complaint
was made to the controller under that section has not expired.
(4) Condition C is that the complaint is vexatious or excessive (see section 20
204A).
(5) In any proceedings where there is an issue as to whether a complaint
is vexatious or excessive, it is for the Commissioner to show that it is.
(6)
25
If the Commissioner refuses to act on a complaint under section 165,
the Commissioner must inform the complainant of—
(a) the refusal and the reasons for it, and
(b) the right under section 166A.
(7) If the Commissioner refuses to act on a complaint under section 165
that does not prevent the complainant making the complaint again.
165B Guidance about responding to complaints and refusing to act 30
(1) The Commissioner must produce and publish guidance about—
(a) how the Commissioner proposes to respond to complaints
made under section 165, and
(b)
35
how the Commissioner proposes to exercise the discretion
conferred by section 165A to refuse to act on a complaint.
(2) The Commissioner—
(a) may alter or replace guidance produced under this section,
and
(b) must publish any altered or replacement guidance.
Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill 69
Part 1—Data protection 
(3) Before producing guidance under this section (including any altered
or replacement guidance), the Commissioner must consult—
(a) the Secretary of State, and
(b) such other persons as the Commissioner considers appropriate.
(4) The Commissioner must arrange for any guidance under this section 5
(including any altered or replacement guidance) to be laid before
Parliament.”
(4) In section 166 (orders to progress complaints), after subsection (1) insert—
“(1A)
10
But this section does not apply if the Commissioner refuses to act on
the complaint in reliance on section 165A.”
(5) After section 166 insert—
“166A Appeals against refusal of Commissioner to act on complaint
(1) Where the Commissioner refuses to act on a complaint in reliance on
15
section 165A, the person who made the complaint may appeal to the
Tribunal.
(2) The Tribunal may review any determination of fact on which the
refusal to act was based.
(3) If the Tribunal considers—
(a) that the refusal to act is not in accordance with the law, or
(b) that the Commissioner ought not to have exercised the 20
discretion to refuse to act,
the Tribunal must allow the appeal.
(4) Otherwise, the Tribunal must dismiss the appeal.”
41 Complaints: minor and consequential amendments
Schedule 8 contains minor and consequential amendments relating to 25
complaints by data subjects.
42 Consequential amendments to the EITSET Regulations
(1) Schedule 2 to the Electronic Identification and Trust Services for Electronic
30
Transactions Regulations 2016 (S.I. 2016/696) (Commissioner’s enforcement
powers) is amended as follows.
(2) In paragraph 1 (provisions of the 2018 Act applied for enforcement purposes)—
(a) after paragraph (g) insert—
“(ga) section 146A (assessment notices: approval of person
to prepare report etc);”, and
(b) after paragraph (i) insert— 35
“(ia) section 148A (interview notices);
(ib) section 148B (interview notices: restrictions);
70 Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill
Part 1—Data protection 
(ic) section 148C (false statements made in response
to interview notices);”.
(3) In paragraph 4(2) (modification of section 143 (information notices:
restrictions))—
(a) in paragraph (b), for “or 148” substitute “, 148 or 148C”, and 5
(b) in paragraph (c), after “148” insert “or 148C”.
(4) In paragraph 6 (modification of section 146 (assessment notices)), in
sub-paragraph (2)—
(a) for paragraph (b) substitute—
“(b) subsection (2) has effect as if— 10
(i) for “controller or processor” there were
substituted “trust service provider”;
(ii) paragraphs (h) and (i) were omitted;”,
(b)
15
in paragraph (c), for “subsections (7), (8), (9) and (10)” substitute
“subsections (3A), (7), (8), (9), (10) and (11A)”, and
(c) in paragraph (d), for “or 148” substitute “, 148 or 148C”.
(5) After paragraph 6 insert—
“Modification of section 146A (assessment notices: approval of person to prepare
report etc)
6A Section 146A has effect as if for “controller or processor” (in each 20
place) there were substituted “trust service provider”.”
(6) After paragraph 7 insert—
“Modification of section 148A (interview notices)
7A Section 148A has effect as if—
(a) in subsection (1)— 25
(i) for “controller or processor” there were substituted
“trust service provider”;
(ii) in paragraph (a), for “as described in section 149(2)”
30
there were substituted “to comply with the eIDAS
requirements”;
(iii) in paragraph (b), for “this Act” there were substituted
“section 144, 148 or 148C or paragraph 15 of Schedule
15”;
(b)
35
in subsection (3), for “controller or processor” (in each place)
there were substituted “trust service provider”.
Modification of section 148B (interview notices: restrictions)
7B (1) Section 148B has effect as if subsections (8) and (9) were omitted.
(2) In that section—
Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill 71
Part 1—Data protection 
(a) subsections (2)(b) and (3)(b) have effect as if for “the data
protection legislation” there were substituted “the eIDAS
Regulation or the EITSET Regulations”;
(b)
5
subsection (6)(a) has effect as if for “this Act” there were
substituted “section 144, 148 or 148C or paragraph 15 of
Schedule 15”;
(c) subsection (7) has effect as if for “this Act (other than an
offence under section 148C)” there were substituted “section
144 or 148 or paragraph 15 of Schedule 15”.”
(7) In paragraph 12 (modification of Schedule 15 (powers of entry and inspection)), 10
in sub-paragraph (2), in the substituted paragraph (a), for “or 148” substitute
“, 148 or 148C”.
(8) Omit paragraph 21 (modification of section 182 (regulations and consultation))
and the heading before it.
(9) In paragraph 22 (modification of section 196 (penalties for offences)), in 15
sub-paragraph (2)(b)—
(a) after “148”, in the first place it occurs, insert “, 148C”, and
(b) for “or 148” substitute “, 148 or 148C”.
Protection of prohibitions, restrictions and data subject’s rights
43 Protection of prohibitions, restrictions and data subject’s rights 20
(1) The 2018 Act is amended in accordance with subsections (2) and (3).
(2) After section 183 insert—
“Prohibitions and restrictions etc on processing
183A Protection of prohibitions and restrictions etc on processing
(1) A relevant enactment or rule of law which imposes a duty, or confers 25
a power, to process personal data does not override a requirement
under the main data protection legislation relating to the processing
of personal data.
(2) Subsection (1) does not apply—
(a) to a relevant enactment forming part of the main data 30
protection legislation, or
(b) to the extent that an enactment makes express provision to the
contrary referring to this section or to the main data protection
legislation (or a provision of that legislation).
(3) Subsection (1) does not prevent a duty or power to process personal 35
data from being taken into account for the purpose of determining
whether it is possible to rely on an exception to a requirement under
the main data protection legislation that is available where there is
such a duty or power.
72 Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill
Part 1—Data protection 
(4) In this section—
“the main data protection legislation” means the data protection
legislation other than provision of or made under—
(a) Chapter 6 or 8 of the UK GDPR, or
(b) Parts 5 to 7 of this Act; 5
“relevant enactment” means an enactment so far as passed or
made on or after the day on which section 43 of the Data
Protection and Digital Information Act 2023 comes into force;
“requirement” includes a prohibition or restriction.
(5) The reference in subsection (1) to an enactment or rule of law which 10
imposes a duty, or confers a power, to process personal data is a
reference to an enactment or rule of law which, directly or indirectly,
requires or authorises the processing of personal data, including (for
example)—
(a) by authorising one person to require another person to process 15
personal data, or
(b) by removing restrictions on processing personal data,
and the references in subsection (3) to a duty or power are to be read
accordingly.”
(3) In section 186 (data subject’s rights and other prohibitions and restrictions)— 20
(a) for the heading substitute “Protection of data subject’s rights”,
(b) in subsection (1) omit “, except as provided by or under the provisions
listed in subsection (3)”,
(c) after subsection (2) insert—
“(2A) Subsection (1) does not apply— 25
(a) to an enactment contained in, or made under, a
provision falling within subsection (2) or (3), or
(b) to the extent that an enactment makes express provision
30
to the contrary referring to this section or to a provision
falling within subsection (2).”, and
(d) in subsection (3)—
(i) for “provisions providing exceptions” substitute “further
provisions referred to in subsection (2A)(a)”, and
(ii) omit paragraph (c) (and the “and” after it).
(4) In section 5 of the European Union (Withdrawal) Act 2018 (exceptions to 35
savings and incorporation), in subsection (A3)(a)—
(a) for “section” substitute “sections 183A and”, and
(b) for “(data subject’s rights and other prohibitions and restrictions)”
40
substitute “(protection of prohibitions, restrictions and data subject’s
rights)”.
Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill 73
Part 1—Data protection 
Miscellaneous
44 Regulations under the UK GDPR
(1) In the UK GDPR, after Chapter 9 insert—
“CHAPTER 9A
Regulations 5
Article 91A
Regulations made by Secretary of State
1. This Article makes provision about regulations made by the Secretary
of State under this Regulation (“UK GDPR regulations”).
2. Before making UK GDPR regulations, the Secretary of State must 10
consult—
(a) the Commissioner, and
(b) such other persons as the Secretary of State considers appropriate.
3.
15
Paragraph 2 does not apply to regulations made under Article 49 or
49A where the Secretary of State has made an urgency statement in
respect of them.
4. UK GDPR regulations may—
(a) make different provision for different purposes;
(b)
20
include consequential, supplementary, incidental, transitional,
transitory or saving provision.
5. UK GDPR regulations are to be made by statutory instrument.
6. For the purposes of this Regulation, where regulations are subject to
“the negative resolution procedure”, the statutory instrument containing
25
the regulations is subject to annulment in pursuance of a resolution
of either House of Parliament.
7. For the purposes of this Regulation, where regulations are subject to
“the affirmative resolution procedure”, the regulations may not be
made unless a draft of the statutory instrument containing them has
30
been laid before Parliament and approved by a resolution of each
House of Parliament.
8. For the purposes of this Regulation, where regulations are subject to
“the made affirmative resolution procedure”—
(a) the statutory instrument containing the regulations must be laid
35
before Parliament after being made, together with the urgency
statement in respect of them, and
(b) the regulations cease to have effect at the end of the period of
120 days beginning with the day on which the instrument is
74 Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill
Part 1—Data protection 
made, unless within that period the instrument is approved by
a resolution of each House of Parliament.
9. In calculating the period of 120 days, no account is to be taken of any
whole days that fall within a period during which—
(a) Parliament is dissolved or prorogued, or 5
(b) both Houses of Parliament are adjourned for more than 4 days.
10. Where regulations cease to have effect as a result of paragraph 8, that
does not—
(a) affect anything previously done under the regulations, or
(b) prevent the making of new regulations. 10
11. Any provision that may be included in UK GDPR regulations subject
to the negative resolution procedure may be made by regulations
made under this Regulation or another enactment that are subject to
15
the affirmative resolution procedure or the made affirmative resolution
procedure.
12. A requirement under this Article to consult may be satisfied by
consultation before, as well as by consultation after, the provision
conferring the power to make regulations comes into force.
13.
20
In this Article, “urgency statement”, in relation to regulations, means
a reasoned statement that the Secretary of State considers it desirable
for the regulations to come into force without delay.”
(2) In section 3(9) of the 2018 Act (definition of “data protection legislation”), in
paragraph (d), after “Act” insert “or the UK GDPR”.
45 Minor amendments
Schedule 9 contains minor amendments of the UK GDPR and the 2018 Act. 25
PART 2
DIGITAL VERIFICATION SERVICES
Introductory
46 Introductory
(1) This Part contains provision to secure the reliability of digital verification 30
services by means of—
(a) a trust framework (see section 47),
(b) a register (see section 48),
(c) an information gateway (see section 54), and
(d) a trust mark (see section 57). 35
(2) In this Part—
Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill 75
Part 2—Digital verification services 
“digital verification services” means verification services provided to any
extent by means of the internet, and
“verification services” means services that are provided at the request
of an individual and consist in—
(a) ascertaining or verifying a fact about the individual from 5
information provided otherwise than by the individual, and
(b) confirming to another person that the fact about the individual
has been ascertained or verified from information so provided.
DVS trust framework
47 DVS trust framework 10
(1) The Secretary of State must prepare and publish a document setting out rules
concerning the provision of digital verification services.
(2) The document is referred to in this Part as the DVS trust framework.
(3) In preparing the DVS trust framework, the Secretary of State must consult—
(a) the Information Commissioner, and 15
(b) such other persons as the Secretary of State thinks appropriate.
(4) The requirement in subsection (3) may be satisfied by consultation undertaken
before the coming into force of this section.
(5) At least every 12 months, the Secretary of State must—
(a) carry out a review of the DVS trust framework, and 20
(b) in doing so, consult the persons mentioned in subsection (3).
(6) The Secretary of State may revise and republish the DVS trust framework,
whether following a review under subsection (5) or otherwise.
(7)
25
The DVS trust framework, and any revised version of the framework, comes
into force at the time of its publication, unless it specifies a different
commencement time.
(8) The DVS trust framework, and any revised version of the framework, may—
(a) specify different commencement times for different purposes, and
(b) include transitional provisions and savings.
DVS register 30
48 DVS register
(1) The Secretary of State must establish and maintain a register of persons
providing digital verification services.
(2) The register is referred to in this Part as the DVS register.
(3) The Secretary of State must make the DVS register publicly available. 35
76 Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill
Part 2—Digital verification services 
(4) The Secretary of State must, subject to section 52(9), register a person providing
digital verification services in the DVS register if—
(a) the person holds a certificate from an accredited conformity assessment
5
body certifying that the digital verification services provided by the
person are provided in accordance with the DVS trust framework,
(b) the person applies to be registered in the DVS register in respect of
the digital verification services to which the certificate relates,
(c) the application complies with any requirements imposed by a
determination under section 49, and
(d) the person pays any fee required to be paid by a determination under 10
section 50(1).
(5) The Secretary of State may not otherwise register a person in the DVS register.
(6) For the purposes of subsection (4)(a), a certificate is to be ignored if—
(a) it has expired in accordance with its terms,
(b) it has been withdrawn by the body that issued it, or 15
(c) it is required to be ignored by reason of provision included in the
DVS trust framework under section 53.
(7) In this section—
20
“accredited conformity assessment body” means a conformity assessment
body that is accredited by the UK national accreditation body in
accordance with Article 5 of the Accreditation Regulation as competent
to carry out assessments of whether digital verification services are
provided in accordance with the DVS trust framework;
25
“the Accreditation Regulation” means Regulation (EC) No 765/2008 of
the European Parliament and of the Council of 9 July 2008 setting out
the requirements for accreditation and market surveillance relating to
the marketing of products and repealing Regulation (EEC) No 339/93;
“conformity assessment body” has the same meaning as in the
Accreditation Regulation (see Article 2(13) of that Regulation);
“the UK national accreditation body” means the UK national accreditation 30
body for the purposes of Article 4(1) of the Accreditation Regulation.
49 Applications for registration
(1) The Secretary of State may determine—
(a) the form of an application for registration in the DVS register,
(b) the information to be contained in or provided with an application 35
for registration in that register,
(c) the documents to be provided with an application for registration in
that register, and
(d)
40
the manner in which an application for registration in that register is
to be submitted.
(2) A determination may make different provision for different purposes.
(3) The Secretary of State must publish a determination.
Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill 77
Part 2—Digital verification services 
(4) The Secretary of State may revise a determination.
(5) If the Secretary of State revises a determination the Secretary of State must
publish the determination as revised.
50 Fees for registration
(1) The Secretary of State may determine that a person who applies for registration in 5
the DVS register must pay a fee to the Secretary of State of an amount specified in
the determination.
(2) A determination under subsection (1) may specify an amount which exceeds
the administrative costs of determining an application for registration.
(3) The Secretary of State may determine that a person who is registered in the DVS 10
register must, at times specified in the determination, pay a fee to the Secretary of
State of an amount specified in the determination.
(4) A determination under subsection (3) may specify an amount which exceeds
15
the administrative costs associated with a person’s continued registration in
the DVS register.
(5) A fee payable under subsection (3) is recoverable summarily as a civil debt.
(6) A determination may make different provision for different purposes.
(7) The Secretary of State must publish a determination.
(8) The Secretary of State may revise a determination.
(9) If the Secretary of State revises a determination the Secretary of State must 20
publish the determination as revised.
51 Duty to remove person from the DVS register
(1) The Secretary of State must remove a person from the DVS register if the
person—
(a) asks to be removed from the register, 25
(b) ceases to provide digital verification services in respect of which the
person is registered in the register, or
(c) no longer holds a certificate from an accredited conformity assessment
30
body certifying that those digital verification services are provided in
accordance with the DVS trust framework.
(2) For the purposes of subsection (1)(c), a certificate is to be ignored if—
(a) it has expired in accordance with its terms,
(b) it has been withdrawn by the body that issued it, or
(c)
35
it is required to be ignored by reason of provision included in the
DVS trust framework under section 53.
(3) In this section, “accredited conformity assessment body” has the same meaning
as in section 48.
78 Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill
Part 2—Digital verification services 
52 Power to remove person from the DVS register
(1) The Secretary of State may remove a person from the DVS register if the
Secretary of State is satisfied that—
(a)
5
the person is failing to provide digital verification services in respect
of which the person is registered in accordance with DVS trust
framework, or
(b) the person has failed to provide the Secretary of State with information
in accordance with a notice under section 58.
(2)
10
Before removing a person from the DVS register under this section the
Secretary of State must, by written notice, inform the person that the Secretary
of State intends to do so.
(3) The notice must—
(a) state the name and address of the person,
(b)
15
state the reason why the Secretary of State is satisfied that the person
is failing or has failed as mentioned in subsection (1),
(c) state the period the Secretary of State intends to specify in the notice
under subsection (8),
(d) state that the person may make written representations to the Secretary
of State about—
(i) the Secretary of State’s intention to remove the person from 20
the DVS register, and
(ii) the period the Secretary of State intends to specify in the notice
under subsection (8), and
(e) specify the period within which such representations may be made.
(4) The period specified for making written representations must be a period of 25
not less than 21 days beginning with the day the notice is given.
(5) If the Secretary of State considers that it is appropriate for the person to have
an opportunity to make oral representations about the matters mentioned in
subsection (3)(d), the notice must also—
(a) state that the person may make such representations, and 30
(b) specify the arrangements for making such representations and the
time at which, or the period within which, they may be made.
(6) The Secretary of State may not remove the person from the DVS register
35
before a time, or before the end of a period, specified in the notice for making
oral or written representations.
(7) When deciding whether to remove the person from the DVS register, the
Secretary of State must consider any oral or written representations made by
the person in accordance with the notice.
(8)
40
Where the Secretary of State removes the person from the DVS register, the
Secretary of State must by written notice inform the person—
(a) that the person has been removed from the register, and
Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill 79
Part 2—Digital verification services 
(b) that any application for re-registration made by the person during a
period specified in the notice must be refused.
(9) If the person applies to be re-registered during the period specified in the
5
notice under subsection (8)(b) the Secretary of State must refuse the
application.
(10) The period specified in the notice under subsection (8)(b) must begin with
the day the notice is given and must not exceed two years.
53 Revising the DVS trust framework: top-up certificates
(1)
10
This section applies where the Secretary of State revises and republishes the
DVS trust framework and the revisions include—
(a) the addition of a rule, or
(b) the alteration of an existing rule.
(2) The DVS trust framework may provide that, on and after a specified date, a
15
pre-revision certificate is required to be ignored for the purposes of section
48(4)(a) and 51(1)(c), unless the person holding the certificate also holds a
top-up certificate from an accredited conformity assessment body.
(3) In this section—
“accredited conformity assessment body” has the same meaning as in
section 48;
“pre-revision certificate” means a certificate issued before the time the 20
additional rule or (as the case may be) the alteration of the existing
rule comes into force;
“specified” means specified in the DVS trust framework;
25
“top-up certificate” means a certificate certifying that the digital
verification services provided by the holder of the certificate are
provided in accordance with the additional rule or (as the case may
be) the existing rule, as altered.
Information gateway
54 Power of public authority to disclose information to registered person
(1) This section applies where— 30
(a) a person is registered in the DVS register, and
(b) an individual makes a request to the person for the provision of digital
verification services in respect of which the person is registered.
(2)
35
A public authority may disclose to the person information relating to the
individual for the purpose of enabling the person to provide the digital
verification services for the individual.
(3) A disclosure of information under this section does not breach—
(a) any obligation of confidence owed by the public authority making the
disclosure, or
80 Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill
Part 2—Digital verification services 
(b) any other restriction on the disclosure of information (however
imposed).
(4) But this section does not authorise a disclosure of information which—
(a)
5
would contravene the data protection legislation (but in determining
whether a disclosure would do so, the power conferred by this section
is to be taken into account), or
(b) is prohibited by any of Parts 1 to 7 or Chapter 1 of Part 9 of the
Investigatory Powers Act 2016.
(5)
10
This section does not authorise a public authority to disclose information
obtained by the authority otherwise than in connection with the exercise by
the authority of functions of a public nature.
(6) This section does not affect a power to disclose information that exists apart
from this section.
(7)
15
A public authority may charge a person fees in respect of the disclosure to
the person of information under this section.
(8) In this section—
“data protection legislation” has the same meaning as in the 2018 Act
(see section 3(9) of that Act);
“public authority” means a person exercising functions of a public nature.
55 Information disclosed by the Revenue and Customs 20
(1) This section applies where the Revenue and Customs disclose personal
information to a person under section 54 for the purpose of enabling the
person to provide digital verification services for an individual.
(2)
25
The person must not further disclose the information otherwise than for the
purpose of providing digital verification services for the individual, except
with the consent of the Commissioners for His Majesty’s Revenue and
Customs.
(3) Any other person who receives the information, whether directly or indirectly
30
from the person to whom the Revenue and Customs disclose the information,
must not further disclose the information, except with the consent of the
Commissioners for His Majesty’s Revenue and Customs.
(4) If a person discloses information in contravention of this section, section 19
of the Commissioners for Revenue and Customs Act 2005 (offence of wrongful
35
disclosure) applies in relation to that disclosure as it applies in relation to a
disclosure of information in contravention of section 20(9) of that Act.
(5) In this section—
“personal information” means information relating to a person whose
identity—
(a) is specified in the information, or
(b) can be deduced from it; 40
Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill 81
Part 2—Digital verification services 
“the Revenue and Customs” has the meaning given by section 17(3) of
the Commissioners for Revenue and Customs Act 2005.
56 Code of practice about the disclosure of information
(1)
5
The Secretary of State must prepare and publish a code of practice about the
disclosure of information under section 54.
(2) The code of practice must be consistent with the code of practice prepared
under section 121 of the 2018 Act (data-sharing code) and issued under section
125(4) of that Act (as altered or replaced from time to time).
(3)
10
A public authority must have regard to the code of practice in disclosing
information under section 54.
(4) The Secretary of State may from time to time revise and republish the code
of practice.
(5) In preparing or revising the code of practice, the Secretary of State must
consult—
(a) the Information Commissioner, and 15
(b) such other persons as the Secretary of State thinks appropriate.
(6) The requirement in subsection (5) may be satisfied by consultation undertaken
before the coming into force of this section.
(7)
20
The Secretary of State may not publish the first version of the code of practice
unless a draft of the code has been laid before, and approved by a resolution
of, each House of Parliament.
(8) The Secretary of State may not republish the code of practice following its
revision unless—
(a)
25
a draft of the code as revised has been laid before each House of
Parliament, and
(b) the 40-day period has expired without either House of Parliament
resolving not to approve the draft.
(9) “The 40-day period” means—
(a)
30
the period of 40 days beginning with the day on which the draft is
laid before Parliament, or
(b) if the draft is not laid before each House on the same day, the period
of 40 days beginning with the later of the days on which it is laid
before Parliament.
(10)
35
In calculating the 40-day period, no account is to be taken of any whole days
that fall within a period during which Parliament is dissolved or prorogued
or during which both Houses are adjourned for more than 4 days.
(11) In this section, “public authority” means a person exercising functions of a
public nature.
82 Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill
Part 2—Digital verification services 
Trust mark
57 Trust mark for use by registered persons
(1) The Secretary of State may designate a mark for use in the course of providing,
or offering to provide, digital verification services.
(2) A mark designated under this section must be published by the Secretary of 5
State.
(3) A mark designated under this section may not be used by a person in the
course of providing, or offering to provide, digital verification services unless
10
the person is registered in the DVS register in respect of those digital
verification services.
(4) The Secretary of State may enforce subsection (3) in civil proceedings for an
injunction or, in Scotland, an interdict.
Supplementary
58 Power of Secretary of State to require information
(1) The Secretary of State may by written notice require— 15
(a) an accredited conformity assessment body, or
(b) a person registered in the DVS register,
to provide the Secretary of State with information that the Secretary of State
20
reasonably requires for the purposes of the exercise of the Secretary of State’s
functions under this Part.
(2) A notice under this section must state why the information is required for
the purposes of the exercise of those functions.
(3) A notice under this section—
(a)
25
may specify or describe particular information or a category of
information;
(b) may specify the form in which the information must be provided;
(c) may specify the time at which, or the period within which, the
information must be provided;
(d) may specify the place where the information must be provided.
(4) A notice under this section that is given to a person registered in the DVS 30
register must provide information about the consequences under section 52
of failure to comply with the notice.
(5) The Secretary of State may cancel a notice under this section by notice to the
person to whom it was given.
(6) A disclosure of information required by a notice under this section does not 35
breach—
(a) any obligation of confidence owed by the person making the disclosure,
or
Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill 83
Part 2—Digital verification services 
(b) any other restriction on the disclosure of information (however
imposed).
(7) But a notice under this section does not require a disclosure of information
if the disclosure—
(a) would contravene section 55, 5
(b) would contravene the data protection legislation (but in determining
whether a disclosure would do so, the duty imposed by the notice is
to be taken into account), or
(c)
10
is prohibited by any of Parts 1 to 7 or Chapter 1 of Part 9 of the
Investigatory Powers Act 2016.
(8) A notice under this section does not require a person to provide the Secretary
of State with information in respect of a communication which is made—
(a) between a professional legal adviser and the adviser’s client, and
(b)
15
in connection with the giving of legal advice to the client with respect
to obligations, liabilities or rights under this Part.
(9) In subsection (8) references to the client of a professional legal adviser include
references to a person acting on behalf of the client.
(10) A notice under this section does not require a person to provide the Secretary
20
of State with information if doing so would, by revealing evidence of the
commission of an offence, expose the person to proceedings for that offence.
(11) The reference to an offence in subsection (10) does not include an offence
under—
(a) section 5 of the Perjury Act 1911 (false statements made otherwise
than on oath);
(b) section 44(2) of the Criminal Law (Consolidation) (Scotland) Act 1995 25
(false statements made otherwise than on oath);
(c) Article 10 of the Perjury (Northern Ireland) Order 1979 (S.I. 1979/1714
(N.I. 19)) (false statutory declarations and other false unsworn
statements).
(12) In this section— 30
“accredited conformity assessment body” has the same meaning as in
section 48;
“data protection legislation” has the same meaning as in the 2018 Act
(see section 3(9) of that Act).
59 Arrangements for third party to exercise functions 35
(1) The Secretary of State may make arrangements for a person prescribed by
regulations under this section to exercise functions of the Secretary of State
under this Part (and where arrangements are made, references in this Part to
the Secretary of State are to be read accordingly).
(2) Arrangements under this section may— 40
84 Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill
Part 2—Digital verification services 
(a) provide for the Secretary of State to make payments to the person,
and
(b) make provision as to the circumstances in which any such payments
are to be repaid to the Secretary of State.
(3) Regulations under this section are subject to the affirmative resolution 5
procedure.
60 Report on the operation of this Part
(1) The Secretary of State must prepare and publish reports on the operation of
this Part.
(2) The first report must be published within the period of 12 months beginning 10
with the day on which section 47 comes into force.
(3) The reports must be published not more than 12 months apart.
PART 3
CUSTOMER DATA AND BUSINESS DATA
61 Customer data and business data 15
(1) This Part confers powers on the Secretary of State and the Treasury to make
provision in connection with access to customer data and business data.
(2) In this Part—
“business data”, in relation to a trader, means—
(a) information about goods, services and digital content supplied 20
or provided by the trader,
(b) information relating to the supply or provision of goods,
services and digital content by the trader (such as, for example,
25
information about where they are supplied, the terms on which
they are supplied or provided, prices or performance),
(c) information relating to feedback from customers about the
goods, services or digital content, and
(d) information relating to the provision of business data to a
person in accordance with data regulations;
“customer data” means information relating to a customer of a trader, 30
including—
(a) information relating to transactions between a customer and
the trader, and
(b)
35
information relating to the provision of customer data to a
person in accordance with data regulations;
“data holder”, in relation to customer data or business data of a trader,
means—
(a) the trader, or
(b) a person who, in the course of a business, processes the data;
Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill 85
Part 3—Customer data and business data 
“data regulations” means regulations under section 62 or 64;
“trader” means a person who supplies or provides goods, services or
digital content in the course of a business, whether acting personally
5
or through another person acting in the trader’s name or on the
trader’s behalf.
(3) For the purposes of this Part, a person (“C”) is a customer of a trader (“T”)
if—
(a) C has at any time purchased goods, services or digital content supplied
10
or provided by T (whether for use by C or another person) or received
such goods, services or digital content free of charge from T, and
(b) the purchase or receipt occurred—
(i) otherwise than in the course of a business, or
(ii) in the course of a business of a description for the time being
15
specified by the Secretary of State or the Treasury by
regulations.
(4) In subsection (3)(a), the references to purchase or receipt of goods, services
or digital content at any time include purchase or receipt before this section
comes into force.
(5) In this Part—
(a) a reference to providing customer data or business data to a person 20
includes a reference to providing the person with access to such data
or with the ability to provide other persons with access to such data,
and
(b)
25
a reference to a person receiving customer data or business data
includes a reference to a person obtaining access to such data or the
ability to provide other persons with access to such data.
62 Power to make provision in connection with customer data
(1) The Secretary of State or the Treasury may by regulations make provision
requiring a data holder to provide customer data—
(a) to the customer, at the customer’s request, or 30
(b) to a person who is authorised by the customer to receive the data (an
“authorised person”), at the customer’s request or at the authorised
person’s request.
(2)
35
The Secretary of State or the Treasury may by regulations make provision
enabling or requiring a data holder—
(a) to produce, collect or retain, or arrange for the production, collection
or retention of, customer data;
(b) to make changes to customer data, including to require rectification
40
of inaccurate customer data, at the request of a customer or authorised
person.
(3) The Secretary of State or the Treasury may by regulations make provision
for a person who is an authorised person in relation to customer data to
exercise, on the customer’s behalf, some or all of the customer’s rights in
86 Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill
Part 3—Customer data and business data 
relation to goods, services or digital content supplied or provided by a person
who is, or has been, a data holder in relation to the customer data.
(4) In deciding whether to make regulations under this section, the Secretary of
State or the Treasury must have regard to (among other things)—
(a) the likely effects for existing and future customers, 5
(b) the likely effects for data holders,
(c) the likely effect on small businesses and micro businesses,
(d) the likely effect on innovation in the supply or provision of goods,
10
services and digital content affected by the regulations or other goods,
services and digital content, and
(e) the likely effect on competition in markets for goods, services and
digital content affected by the regulations or other markets.
63 Customer data: supplementary
(1)
15
This section is about provision that regulations under section 62 may (among
other things) contain.
(2) The regulations may make provision about requests relating to customer data,
including provision about the circumstances in which a data holder may or
must refuse to act on a request.
(3)
20
The regulations may make provision about the procedure by which customers
authorise persons to receive customer data or to do other things, including—
(a) provision restricting the persons that may be authorised to persons
that comply with specified conditions or conditions imposed by a
specified person;
(b)
25
provision for a specified person (a “decision-maker”) to decide whether
a person satisfies the conditions for authorisation (and see section 66
for further provision about decision-makers).
(4) The regulations may make provision about the providing of customer data
and the exercising of customers’ rights, including—
(a)
30
provision requiring customer data to be provided on one or more
occasions, for a specified period or at specified intervals;
(b) provision requiring the use of specified facilities or services, including
dashboard services, other electronic communications services or
application programme interfaces;
(c)
35
provision requiring a data holder to participate in, or comply with,
arrangements for establishing, maintaining or managing such facilities
or services;
(d) provision requiring a data holder to provide, or arrange for, assistance
in connection with the establishment, maintenance or management of
such facilities or services.
(5) The regulations may include— 40
Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill 87
Part 3—Customer data and business data 
(a) provision enabling or requiring a data holder to produce, collect or
retain, or arrange for the production, collection or retention of, records
of customer data provided in accordance with the regulations;
(b)
5
provision enabling or requiring an authorised person to produce or
retain, or arrange for the production or retention of, records of
customer data received in accordance with the regulations.
(6) The regulations may make provision requiring a person who, in the course
of a business, processes customer data of a trader to assist, or take specified
steps to assist, the trader in complying with regulations under this Part.
(7) The regulations may make provision about the processing of customer data 10
provided to an authorised person in accordance with the regulations,
including—
(a) provision requiring the use of specified facilities or services, including
15
dashboard services, other electronic communications services or
application programme interfaces;
(b) provision requiring the authorised person to participate in, or comply
with, arrangements for establishing, maintaining or managing such
facilities or services;
(c)
20
provision requiring the authorised person to provide, or arrange for,
assistance in connection with the establishment, maintenance or
management of such facilities or services;
(d) provision about further disclosure of the data, including provision for
a person to whom customer data is further disclosed to be subject to—
(i)
25
some or all of the obligations imposed on an authorised person
by the regulations in relation to the customer data;
(ii) conditions imposed by the authorised person.
(8) The regulations may make provision enabling or requiring a data holder or
an authorised person to publish specified information relating to the rights
and obligations of persons under the regulations, including—
(a) information about the rights of customers in relation to customer data 30
processed by the data holder or authorised person;
(b) information about the activities carried out by the data holder or
authorised person in performance of their obligations under the
regulations.
(9) The regulations may make provision about complaints, including provision 35
requiring data holders, authorised persons or decision-makers to implement
procedures for the handling of complaints.
(10) The regulations may make provision about procedures for the resolution of
disputes, including—
(a) provision appointing, or providing for the appointment of, a person 40
to determine disputes;
(b) provision about the person’s powers when determining disputes;
(c) provision about the effect of decisions relating to disputes;
88 Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill
Part 3—Customer data and business data 
(d) provision for the person to review the person’s decisions relating to
disputes;
(e) provision about appeals to a court or tribunal.
64 Power to make provision in connection with business data
(1) The Secretary of State or the Treasury may by regulations make provision 5
requiring a data holder to publish business data or to provide business data
on request—
(a) to a customer of the trader, or
(b) to another person of a specified description (a “third party recipient”).
(2) The Secretary of State or the Treasury may by regulations make provision 10
enabling or requiring a data holder to produce, collect or retain, or arrange
for the production, collection or retention of, business data.
(3) In deciding whether to make regulations under this section, the Secretary of
State or the Treasury must have regard to (among other things)—
(a) the likely effects for existing and future customers, 15
(b) the likely effects for data holders,
(c) the likely effect on small businesses and micro businesses,
(d) the likely effect on innovation in the supply or provision of goods,
20
services and digital content affected by the regulations or other goods,
services and digital content, and
(e) the likely effect on competition in markets for goods, services and
digital content affected by the regulations or other markets.
65 Business data: supplementary
(1)
25
This section is about provision that regulations under section 64 may (among
other things) contain.
(2) The regulations may make provision about requests for business data,
including—
(a) provision for requests to be made by a customer, a third party recipient
or another person;
(b) provision about the circumstances in which a data holder may or must 30
refuse to act on a request.
(3) The regulations may make provision requiring business data to be provided
to persons approved to receive it (“approved persons”), including—
(a)
35
provision restricting the persons that may be approved to persons that
comply with specified conditions or conditions imposed by a specified
person;
(b) provision for a specified person (a “decision-maker”) to decide whether
a person satisfies the conditions for approval (and see section 66 for
further provision about decision-makers).
(4) The regulations may make provision about the providing or publishing of 40
business data, including—
Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill 89
Part 3—Customer data and business data 
(a) provision requiring business data to be provided or published on one
or more occasions, for a specified period or at specified intervals;
(b) provision requiring the use of specified facilities or services, including
5
dashboard services, other electronic communications services or
application programme interfaces;
(c) provision requiring a data holder to participate in, or comply with,
arrangements for establishing, maintaining or managing such facilities
or services;
(d)
10
provision requiring a data holder to provide, or arrange for, assistance
in connection with the establishment, maintenance or management of
such facilities or services.
(5) The regulations may include—
(a) provision enabling or requiring a data holder to produce, collect or
15
retain, or arrange for the production, collection or retention of, records
of business data provided in accordance with the regulations;
(b) provision enabling or requiring a third party recipient to produce or
retain, or arrange for the production or retention of, records of business
data received in accordance with the regulations.
(6)
20
The regulations may make provision requiring a person who, in the course
of a business, processes business data of a trader to assist, or take specified
steps to assist, the trader in complying with regulations under this Part.
(7) The regulations may make provision about the processing of business data
provided to a person in accordance with the regulations, including—
(a)
25
provision requiring the use of specified facilities or services, including
dashboard services, other electronic communications services or
application programme interfaces;
(b) provision requiring the person to participate in, or comply with,
arrangements for establishing, maintaining or managing such facilities
or services;
(c) provision requiring the person to provide, or arrange for, assistance 30
in connection with the establishment, maintenance or management of
such facilities or services;
(d) provision about further disclosure of the data, including provision for
35
a person to whom business data is further disclosed to be subject to
some or all of the obligations imposed on customers or third party
recipients by the regulations in relation to the business data.
(8) The regulations may make provision enabling or requiring a data holder or
an approved person to publish specified information relating to the rights
40
and obligations of persons under the regulations, including information about
the activities carried out by the data holder or approved person in performance
of their obligations under the regulations.
(9) The regulations may make provision about complaints, including provision
requiring data holders or decision-makers to implement procedures for the
handling of complaints.
90 Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill
Part 3—Customer data and business data 
(10) The regulations may make provision about procedures for the resolution of
disputes, including—
(a) provision appointing, or providing for the appointment of, a person
to determine disputes;
(b) provision about the person’s powers when determining disputes; 5
(c) provision about the effect of decisions relating to disputes;
(d) provision for the person to review the person’s decisions relating to
disputes;
(e) provision about appeals to a court or tribunal.
66 Decision-makers 10
(1) This section is about the provision about decision-makers that regulations
under section 62 or 64 must or may (among other things) contain.
(2) The regulations may make provision about the appointment of a
decision-maker.
(3) The regulations may make provision enabling or requiring a decision-maker 15
to suspend or revoke a decision.
(4) The regulations may confer powers on a decision-maker for the purpose of
monitoring compliance with conditions for authorisation or approval
20
(“monitoring powers”) (and see section 67 for provision about enforcement
of requirements imposed in exercise of those powers).
(5) The powers that may be conferred under subsection (4) include powers to
require the provision of information (but such powers are subject to the
restrictions in section 68 as well as any restrictions included in the regulations).
(6)
25
The regulations must make provision about the rights of persons affected by
the exercise of a decision-maker’s functions under the regulations and such
provision may include (among other things)—
(a) provision for decisions to be reviewed by the decision-maker or a
specified person;
(b) provision about appeals to a court or tribunal.
(7) The regulations may make provision enabling or requiring a decision-maker 30
to publish, or provide to a specified person, specified information relating to
the exercise of the decision-maker’s functions.
(8) The regulations may make provision for a decision-maker to arrange for its
monitoring powers to be carried out by a specified person.
(9) The regulations may— 35
(a) provide for functions under the regulations to be exercisable by more
than one decision-maker (whether jointly or concurrently);
(b) where functions of decision-makers are exercisable concurrently—
(i)
40
provide for one of the decision-makers to be the lead
decision-maker;
Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill 91
Part 3—Customer data and business data 
(ii) require the other decision-makers to consult the lead
decision-maker before exercising the functions in a particular
case;
(iii)
5
authorise the lead decision-maker to give directions as to which
decision-maker is to exercise a function in a particular case.
(10) The regulations may make provision enabling or requiring a decision-maker
to produce and publish guidance about how it proposes to exercise its
functions under the regulations (including provision enabling or requiring
10
decision-makers with functions exercisable jointly or concurrently to produce
joint guidance).
67 Enforcement of data regulations
(1) The Secretary of State or the Treasury may by regulations make provision—
(a) for the enforcement of data regulations, and
(b)
15
for the enforcement of requirements imposed in exercise of a power
conferred by regulations under this Part,
including provision for enforcement by a specified public body (an “enforcer”).
(2) The following subsections and sections 68 and 69 make provision about what
regulations under subsection (1) may or must (among other things) contain.
(3) The regulations may confer powers of investigation on an enforcer, including—
(a) powers to require the provision of information, and 20
(b) powers of entry, inspection, search and seizure,
but such powers are subject to the restrictions in section 68 (as well as any
restrictions included in the regulations).
(4) The regulations may—
(a) make provision enabling an enforcer to issue a notice (“a compliance 25
notice”) requiring compliance with—
(i) data regulations;
(ii) a condition for authorisation or approval imposed by a
decision-maker;
(iii) a requirement imposed in the exercise of a power conferred 30
by regulations under this Part;
(b) make provision for the enforcement of compliance notices, including
provision for their enforcement as if they were orders of a court or
tribunal;
(c) make provision enabling an enforcer to publish a statement to the 35
effect that the enforcer considers that a person is not complying with
data regulations or a compliance notice.
(5) The regulations may make provision creating offences punishable with a fine
40
(or a fine not exceeding an amount specified in the regulations) in respect
of—
(a) the provision of false or misleading information in response to a
request made in accordance with regulations under this Part;
92 Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill
Part 3—Customer data and business data 
(b) an act or omission (including falsification) which prevents an enforcer
or a decision-maker from accessing information, documents, equipment
or other material.
(6)
5
The regulations may make provision enabling a financial penalty to be
imposed by an enforcer in respect of—
(a) the provision of false or misleading information in response to a
request made in accordance with regulations under this Part;
(b) a failure to comply with a requirement imposed by data regulations;
(c)
10
a failure to comply with a requirement imposed by a compliance
notice;
and see section 69 for further provision about financial penalties.
(7) The regulations may make provision about the rights of persons affected by
the exercise of an enforcer’s functions under the regulations, including—
(a)
15
provision about the review of a decision made in exercise of those
functions;
(b) provision about appeals to a court or tribunal.
(8) The regulations may make provision about complaints, including provision
requiring an enforcer to implement procedures for the handling of complaints.
(9)
20
The regulations may make provision enabling or requiring an enforcer to
publish, or to provide to a specified person, specified information relating to
enforcement under the regulations, including—
(a) information about the exercise of the enforcer’s functions, either
generally or in relation to a particular case, and
(b) information about convictions for offences.
(10) The regulations may make provision for an enforcer to arrange for its powers 25
of investigation under the regulations to be carried out by a specified person.
(11) The regulations may—
(a) provide for functions under the regulations to be exercisable by more
than one enforcer (whether jointly or concurrently);
(b) where functions of enforcers are exercisable concurrently— 30
(i) provide for one of the enforcers to be the lead enforcer;
(ii) require the other enforcers to consult the lead enforcer before
exercising the functions in a particular case;
(iii)
35
authorise the lead enforcer to give directions as to which
enforcer is to exercise a function in a particular case.
(12) The regulations may make provision enabling or requiring an enforcer to
produce and publish guidance about how it proposes to exercise its functions
under the regulations (including provision enabling or requiring enforcers
with functions exercisable jointly or concurrently to produce joint guidance).
68 Restrictions on powers of investigation etc 40
(1) Regulations under this Part may not—
Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill 93
Part 3—Customer data and business data 
(a) authorise entry to a private dwelling without a warrant issued by a
justice, or
(b) require a person to provide information within subsections (2) to (7)
to a decision-maker or an enforcer.
(2) Information is within this subsection if requiring a person to provide the 5
information would involve an infringement of the privileges of either House
of Parliament.
(3) Information is within this subsection if it is information in respect of a
communication which is made—
(a) between a professional legal adviser and the adviser’s client, and 10
(b) in connection with the giving of legal advice to the client with respect
to obligations, liabilities or rights under data regulations.
(4) Information is within this subsection if it is information in respect of a
communication which is made—
(a) between a professional legal adviser and the adviser’s client or between 15
such an adviser or client and another person,
(b) in connection with or in contemplation of proceedings under or arising
out of data regulations, and
(c) for the purposes of such proceedings.
(5) In subsections (3) and (4), references to the client of a professional legal adviser 20
include references to a person acting on behalf of the client.
(6) Information is within this subsection if requiring a person to provide the
information would, by revealing evidence of the commission of an offence,
expose the person to proceedings for that offence.
(7) The reference to an offence in subsection (6) does not include an offence 25
under—
(a) regulations made under this Part;
(b) section 5 of the Perjury Act 1911 (false statements made otherwise
than on oath);
(c) section 44(2) of the Criminal Law (Consolidation) (Scotland) Act 1995 30
(false statements made otherwise than on oath);
(d) Article 10 of the Perjury (Northern Ireland) Order 1979 (S.I. 1979/1714
(N.I. 19)) (false statutory declarations and other false unsworn
statements).
(8) An oral or written statement provided by a person in response to a request 35
for information made by a decision-maker or an enforcer in accordance with
regulations under this Part may not be used in evidence against that person
on a prosecution for an offence (other than an offence under regulations made
under this Part) unless in the proceedings—
(a) in giving evidence the person provides information inconsistent with 40
the statement, and
(b) evidence relating to the statement is adduced, or a question relating
to it is asked, by that person or on that person’s behalf.
94 Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill
Part 3—Customer data and business data 
(9) In this section, “justice” means—
(a) in England and Wales, a justice of the peace,
(b) in Scotland, a sheriff or summary sheriff, and
(c) in Northern Ireland, a lay magistrate.
69 Financial penalties 5
(1) This section is about provision that regulations under this Part conferring
power on an enforcer to impose a financial penalty may or must (among
other things) contain.
(2)
10
The amount of a financial penalty must be specified in, or determined in
accordance with, the regulations.
(3) The regulations must include provision—
(a) requiring an enforcer to issue guidance about how the enforcer
proposes to exercise any discretion to determine the amount of a
15
financial penalty and to have regard to such guidance in exercising
its discretion;
(b) requiring an enforcer, before imposing a financial penalty on a person,
to give the person written notice (a “notice of intent”) of the proposed
financial penalty;
(c)
20
ensuring that the person is given an opportunity to make
representations about the proposed financial penalty;
(d) requiring the enforcer, after the period for making representations, to
decide whether to impose the financial penalty;
(e) requiring the enforcer, if they decide to impose the financial penalty,
25
to give the person notice in writing (a “final notice”) imposing the
penalty;
(f) enabling a person on whom a financial penalty is imposed to appeal
to a court or tribunal in accordance with the regulations;
(g) as to the powers of the court or tribunal on such an appeal.
(4) The regulations may include provision—
(a) enabling a notice of intent or final notice to be withdrawn or amended; 30
(b) requiring an enforcer to withdraw a final notice in circumstances
specified in the regulations;
(c) for a financial penalty to be increased by an amount specified in or
35
determined in accordance with the regulations in the event of late
payment;
(d) as to how financial penalties are recoverable.
70 Fees
(1) The Secretary of State or the Treasury may by regulations—
(a)
40
make provision enabling a person listed in subsection (2), or a person acting
on their behalf, to require other persons to pay fees for the purpose of meeting
Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill 95
Part 3—Customer data and business data 
expenses incurred, or to be incurred, in performing duties, or exercising
powers, imposed or conferred by regulations under this Part, and
(b) make provision about how amounts paid as fees must or may be used.
(2) Those persons are—
(a) data holders; 5
(b) decision-makers;
(c) enforcers;
(d) other persons on whom duties are imposed, or powers are conferred,
by regulations under this Part.
(3) Regulations under subsection (1)— 10
(a) may only provide for a fee to be payable by persons that appear to
the Secretary of State or the Treasury to be capable of being directly
affected by the performance of duties, or the exercise of powers,
imposed or conferred by regulations under this Part;
(b) may provide for the amount of a fee to be an amount which is 15
intended to exceed the cost of the things in respect of which the fee
is charged.
(4) Regulations under subsection (1) must provide for the amount of a fee to
be—
(a) a specified amount or an amount determined in accordance with the 20
regulations, or
(b) an amount not exceeding such an amount.
(5) Regulations under subsection (1) specifying the amount, or maximum amount,
25
of a fee may provide for the amount to increase at specified times and by
amounts determined in accordance with the regulations.
(6) Regulations under subsection (1) enabling a person to determine the amount
of a fee must require the person to publish information about the amount
and how it is determined.
(7)
30
Regulations under subsection (1) may (among other things) make provision
about—
(a) interest on any unpaid amounts;
(b) the recovery of unpaid amounts.
71 Levy
(1) The Secretary of State or the Treasury may by regulations—
(a) impose, or provide for a specified public body to impose, a levy on data holders 35
for the purpose of meeting all or part of the expenses incurred, or to be
incurred, during a period by decision-makers or enforcers or by persons acting
on their behalf, and
(b)
40
make provision about how funds raised by means of the levy must
or may be used.
96 Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill
Part 3—Customer data and business data 
(2) Regulations under subsection (1) may only provide for a levy in respect of
expenses of decision-makers or enforcers to be imposed on data holders that
appear to the Secretary of State or the Treasury to be capable of being directly
5
affected by the exercise of some or all of the functions conferred on the
decision-makers or enforcers by regulations under this Part.
(3) Regulations under subsection (1) providing for a specified public body to
impose a levy must—
(a) make provision about how the rate of the levy is to be determined;
(b)
10
make provision about how the period in respect of which the levy is
payable is to be determined;
(c) require the body to publish information about the rate, the period and
how they are determined.
(4) Regulations under subsection (1) may (among other things) make provision
about—
(a) interest on any unpaid amounts payable by way of a levy; 15
(b) the recovery of such unpaid amounts.
72 Financial assistance
(1) The Secretary of State or the Treasury may give financial assistance to a person
20
for the purpose of meeting any expenses incurred, or to be incurred, by the
person in performing duties or exercising powers under, or in connection
with, regulations made under this Part.
(2) But subsection (1) does not enable financial assistance to be provided to data
holders, customers, authorised persons or approved persons.
(3)
25
The financial assistance may be given on such terms and conditions as the
Secretary of State or the Treasury considers appropriate.
(4) In this section, “financial assistance” means any kind of financial assistance
whether actual or contingent, including a grant, loan, guarantee or indemnity,
but does not include buying a company’s share capital.
73 Confidentiality and data protection
(1) Except as provided by subsection (2), regulations under this Part may provide 30
for the processing of information in accordance with the regulations not to
be in breach of—
(a) any obligation of confidence owed by the person processing the
information, or
(b) any other restriction on the processing of information (however 35
imposed).
(2) Regulations under this Part are not to be read as authorising or requiring
processing of personal data that would contravene the data protection
40
legislation (but in determining whether particular processing of data would
do so, take into account the power conferred or duty imposed by the provision
of the regulations in question).
Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill 97
Part 3—Customer data and business data 
74 Regulations under this Part
(1) Regulations under this Part may (among other things)—
(a) make provision generally or in relation to particular cases;
(b) make different provision for different purposes or areas;
(c) make provision about the form and manner in which things must or 5
may be done;
(d) make provision about the content of requests, notices or other
documents;
(e)
10
make provision about the time by which, or period within which,
things must or may be done;
(f) make provision by reference to specifications or technical requirements
published from time to time by a specified person;
(g) confer functions on a person, including functions involving the exercise
of a discretion;
(h) make incidental, supplementary, consequential, transitory, transitional 15
or saving provision.
(2) Regulations under this Part making the following types of provision may
amend or repeal primary legislation—
(a) provision about the handling of complaints;
(b) provision about the resolution of disputes; 20
(c) provision about appeals;
(d) provision described in subsection (1)(h).
(3) The following regulations under this Part are subject to the affirmative
resolution procedure—
(a) the first regulations under each of section 62(1), (2) and (3) making 25
provision about a particular description of customer data,
(b) the first regulations under each of section 64(1) and (2) making
provision about a particular description of business data,
(c)
30
regulations under section 62 or 64 which make the requirements of
regulations under this Part more onerous for data holders,
(d) regulations under section 66(4), 67, 70 or 71, and
(e) regulations which amend or repeal primary legislation.
(4) Other regulations under this Part are subject to the negative resolution
procedure.
(5) Before making regulations described in subsection (3), the Secretary of State 35
or the Treasury (as the case may be) must consult such of the following as
the Secretary of State or the Treasury considers appropriate—
(a) persons likely to be affected by the regulations;
(b)
40
sectoral regulators with functions in relation to data holders likely to
be affected by the regulations.
(6) In this section, “primary legislation” means—
(a) an Act of Parliament;
98 Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill
Part 3—Customer data and business data 
(b) an Act of the Scottish Parliament;
(c) a Measure or Act of Senedd Cymru;
(d) Northern Ireland legislation;
(e) retained direct principal EU legislation.
75 Duty to review regulations 5
(1) The relevant person must review data regulations for the time being in force—
(a) before the end of the period of 5 years beginning with the day on
which the regulations come into force, and
(b) at subsequent intervals not exceeding 5 years.
(2) In carrying out the review, the relevant person must have regard to the matters 10
to which the relevant person was required to have regard in deciding whether
to make the regulations (see sections 62(4) and 64(3)).
(3) The relevant person must prepare and publish a report setting out the findings
of the review.
(4) The relevant person may omit material from a report under this section before 15
publication if the relevant person thinks the publication of that material—
(a) would contravene the data protection legislation, or
(b) might harm the commercial interests of any person.
(5)
20
The relevant person must lay a copy of any report published under this
section before Parliament.
(6) In this section, “relevant person” means—
(a) in the case of regulations made by the Treasury, the Treasury, and
(b) otherwise, the Secretary of State.
76 Repeal of provisions relating to supply of customer data
Omit sections 89 to 91 of the Enterprise and Regulatory Reform Act 2013 25
(supply of customer data).
77 Interpretation of this Part
In this Part—
30
“application programme interface” has the meaning given by section
74(3) of the Communications Act 2003;
“approved person” has the meaning given by section 65(3);
“authorised person” has the meaning given by section 62(1)(b);
“dashboard service” means an electronic communications service by
35
means of which information may be requested by and provided to a
person;
“the data protection legislation” has the same meaning as in the 2018
Act (see section 3(9) of that Act);
Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill 99
Part 3—Customer data and business data 
“decision-maker” means a person who is a decision-maker described in
section 63(3)(b) or 65(3)(b);
“digital content” means data which is produced and supplied in digital
form;
“electronic communications service” has the meaning given by section 5
32 of the Communications Act 2003;
“enforcer” has the meaning given by section 67(1);
“micro business” has the meaning given by section 33 of the Small
10
Business, Enterprise and Employment Act 2015, read with any
regulations under that section;
“personal data” has the same meaning as in the 2018 Act (see section
3(2) of that Act);
“processing” has the same meaning as in that Act (see section 3(4) of
that Act) and related terms are to be interpreted accordingly;
“public body” means a body or other person whose functions— 15
(a) are of a public nature, or
(b) include functions of that nature,
but in the latter case, the body or person is a public body to the extent
only of those functions;
“small business” has the meaning given by section 33 of the Small 20
Business, Enterprise and Employment Act 2015, read with any
regulations under that section;
“specified” means specified, or of a description specified, by regulations
under this Part;
“third party recipient” has the meaning given by section 64(1)(b). 25
PART 4
OTHER PROVISION ABOUT DIGITAL INFORMATION
Privacy and electronic communications
78 The PEC Regulations
In sections 79 to 86, “the PEC Regulations” means the Privacy and Electronic 30
Communications (EC Directive) Regulations 2003 (S.I. 2003/2426).
79 Storing information in the terminal equipment of a subscriber or user
(1) The PEC Regulations are amended as follows.
(2)
35
In regulation 6 (storing information, or gaining access to information stored,
in the terminal equipment of a subscriber or user)—
(a) for paragraphs (1) and (2) substitute—
“(1) Subject to paragraphs (2) to (2D) and (4), a person must not
store information, or gain access to information stored, in the
terminal equipment of a subscriber or user.
100 Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill
Part 4—Other provision about digital information 
(2) Paragraph (1) does not prevent a person storing information,
or gaining access to information stored, in the terminal
equipment of a subscriber or user if the subscriber or user—
(a)
5
is provided with clear and comprehensive information
about the purpose of the storage or access, and
(b) gives consent to the storage or access.
(2A) Paragraph (1) does not prevent a person storing information,
or gaining access to information stored, in the terminal
equipment of a subscriber or user if—
(a) the person provides an information society service, 10
(b) the sole purpose of the storage or access is to enable
the person—
(i) to collect information for statistical purposes
15
about how the service is used with a view to
making improvements to the service, or
(ii) to collect information for statistical purposes
about how a website by means of which the
service is provided is used with a view to
making improvements to the website,
(c) any information that the storage or access enables the 20
person to collect is not shared with any other person
except for the purpose of enabling that other person to
assist with making improvements to the service or
website,
(d) the subscriber or user is provided with clear and 25
comprehensive information about the purpose of the
storage or access, and
(e) the subscriber or user is given a simple means of
30
objecting (free of charge) to the storage or access and
does not object.
(2B) Paragraph (1) does not prevent a person storing information,
or gaining access to information stored, in the terminal
equipment of a subscriber or user if—
(a)
35
the person provides an information society service by
means of a website,
(b) the sole purpose of the storage or access is—
(i) to enable the way the website appears or
functions when displayed on, or accessed by,
40
the terminal equipment to adapt to the
preferences of the subscriber or user, or
(ii) to otherwise enable an enhancement of the
appearance or functionality of the website when
displayed on, or accessed by, the terminal
equipment,
Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill 101
Part 4—Other provision about digital information 
(c) the subscriber or user is provided with clear and
comprehensive information about the purpose of the
storage or access, and
(d)
5
the subscriber or user is given a simple means of
objecting (free of charge) to the storage or access and
does not object.
(2C) Paragraph (1) does not prevent a person storing information,
or gaining access to information stored, in the terminal
equipment of a subscriber or user if—
(a) the sole purpose of the storage or access is to enable 10
software installed in the terminal equipment to be
updated,
(b) the update is necessary to ensure the security of the
terminal equipment,
(c) the update will not result in an alteration of a setting 15
affecting the privacy of information stored in the
terminal equipment,
(d) the subscriber or user is provided with clear and
20
comprehensive information about the purpose of the
update,
(e) the subscriber or user is given a simple means of
objecting (free of charge) to the update and does not
object,
(f)
25
after the storage or access, the subscriber or user has
an opportunity to disable or postpone the update before
it takes effect, and
(g) in a case where the update takes effect, it is reasonably
practicable for the subscriber or user to remove or
disable the software.
(2D) Paragraph (1) does not prevent a person storing information, 30
or gaining access to information stored, in the terminal
equipment of a subscriber or user if—
(a) the person receives a communication from the terminal
equipment,
(b) the communication is a request from the subscriber or 35
user for emergency assistance or otherwise indicates
that the subscriber or user is in need of emergency
assistance, and
(c)
40
the sole purpose of the storage or access is to enable
the geographical position of the subscriber or user to
be ascertained with a view to the emergency assistance
being provided.”,
(b) in paragraph (3)—
(i) after “Where” insert “on more than one occasion”, and
102 Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill
Part 4—Other provision about digital information 
(ii) for the words from “on more than one occasion, it is” to the
end substitute “for the same purpose—
(a) it is sufficient for the purposes of paragraph (2)
5
that the requirements of that paragraph are met
in respect of the initial use,
(b) it is sufficient for the purposes of paragraph (2A)
that the requirements of sub-paragraph (d) and
(e) of that paragraph are met in respect of the
initial use, and
(c) it is sufficient for the purposes of paragraph (2B) 10
that the requirements of sub-paragraph (c) and
(d) of that paragraph are met in respect of the
initial use.”,
(c) in paragraph (3A)—
(i) for “paragraph (2)” substitute “paragraphs (2)(b), (2A)(e) and 15
(2B)(d)”,
(ii) after “consent”, in both places, insert “or an objection”, and
(iii) after “subscriber”, in both places, insert “or user”, and
(d) after paragraph (4) insert—
“(5) For the purposes of paragraph (4)(b), the technical storage of, 20
or access to, information is strictly necessary for the provision
of an information society service requested by the subscriber
or user if, for example, the storage or access is strictly
necessary—
(a) to protect information provided in connection with, or 25
relating to, the provision of the service requested,
(b) to ensure that the security of the terminal equipment
of the subscriber or user is not adversely affected by
the provision of the service requested,
(c) to prevent or detect fraud in connection with the 30
provision of the service requested,
(d) to prevent or detect technical faults in connection with
the provision of the service requested, or
(e)
35
to enable either of the following things to be done
where necessary for the provision of the service
requested—
(i) automatically authenticating the identity of the
subscriber or user, or
(ii)
40
maintaining a record of selections made on a
website, or information put into a website, by
the subscriber or user.
(6) In this regulation—
(a) a reference to a person storing information, or gaining
access to information stored, in the terminal equipment
Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill 103
Part 4—Other provision about digital information 
of a subscriber or user includes a reference to the person
instigating the storage or access, and
(b) a reference, except in paragraph (2A), to gaining access
5
to information stored in the terminal equipment of a
subscriber or user includes a reference to collecting or
monitoring information automatically emitted by the
terminal equipment.
(7) In this regulation, “website” includes a mobile application and
10
any other platform by means of which an information society
service is provided.”
(3) After regulation 6 insert—
“6A Power to provide exceptions to regulation 6(1)
(1) The Secretary of State may by regulations made by statutory
instrument—
(a) amend these regulations— 15
(i) by adding an exception to the prohibition in regulation
6(1), or
(ii) by omitting or varying an exception to that prohibition,
and
(b) make consequential, incidental or supplementary provision 20
amending these regulations.
(2) Regulations under paragraph (1) may make different provision for
different purposes.
(3)
25
Before making regulations under paragraph (1), the Secretary of State
must consult—
(a) the Information Commissioner, and
(b) such other persons as the Secretary of State considers
appropriate.
(4)
30
A statutory instrument containing regulations under paragraph (1)
may not be made unless a draft of the instrument has been laid before,
and approved by a resolution of, each House of Parliament.
6B Information technology to enable consent to be given, or an objection
to be made, automatically
(1)
35
The Secretary of State may by regulations made by statutory instrument
provide that a person of a specified description may supply, provide
or otherwise make available information technology of a specified
description only if the technology meets specified requirements.
(2) The power conferred by paragraph (1) is to be exercised only for the
40
purpose of securing that information technology supplied, provided
or otherwise made available enables users of the technology to ensure
that any consent they wish to give, or any objection they wish to make,
104 Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill
Part 4—Other provision about digital information 
to an operator of a website for the purposes of regulation 6 is given
or made automatically upon their visiting the website.
(3) Regulations under paragraph (1) may make provision conferring
5
functions on the Information Commissioner relating to the enforcement
of the regulations.
(4) The provision made by reason of paragraph (3) may include provision
applying (with or without modification) provisions of the Data
Protection Act 2018 relating to enforcement.
(5) Regulations under paragraph (1) may—
(a) make different provision for different purposes, and 10
(b) make incidental, supplementary, consequential, transitional or
saving provision.
(6) Before making regulations under paragraph (1), the Secretary of State
must consult—
(a) the Information Commissioner, and 15
(b) such other persons as the Secretary of State considers
appropriate.
(7) A statutory instrument containing regulations under paragraph (1)
20
may not be made unless a draft of the instrument has been laid before,
and approved by a resolution of, each House of Parliament.
(8) In this regulation—
“information technology” includes—
(a) computers,
(b)
25
other devices whose uses include the processing of
information by electronic means (“IT devices”),
(c) parts, accessories and other equipment made or adapted
for use in connection with computers or IT devices,
(d) software and code made or adapted for use in
connection with computers or IT devices, and
(e) networks and other infrastructure (whether physical or 30
virtual) used in connection with other information
technology;
“specified” means specified in regulations made under paragraph
(1);
“website” includes a mobile application and any other platform 35
by means of which an information society service is provided
(and a reference to “an operator” of a website or “visiting” a
website is to be read accordingly).”
80 Unreceived communications
(1) Regulation 2 of the PEC Regulations is amended as follows. 40
(2) In paragraph (1)—
Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill 105
Part 4—Other provision about digital information 
(a) in the definition of “call”, at the end insert “, and a reference to making
a call includes a reference to attempting to establish such a connection”,
and
(b) in the definition of “communication”—
(i) for “exchanged or conveyed between” substitute “transmitted 5
to”, and
(ii) for “conveyed”, in the second place it occurs, substitute
“transmitted”.
(3) After paragraph (1) insert—
“(1A) In the application of these Regulations in relation to— 10
(a) information that is sent but not received,
(b) a communication that is transmitted but not received,
(c) an electronic mail that is sent but not received, or
(d) an unsuccessful attempt to make a call,
a reference to the recipient of the information, communication, 15
electronic mail or call is to be read as a reference to the intended
recipient.”
81 Meaning of “direct marketing”
20
In regulation 2(1) of the PEC Regulations (interpretation), at the appropriate
place, insert—
““direct marketing” means the communication (by whatever means) of
advertising or marketing material which is directed to particular
individuals;”.
82 Use of electronic mail for direct marketing purposes
(1) Regulation 22 of the PEC Regulations (use of electronic mail for direct 25
marketing purposes) is amended as follows.
(2) In paragraph (2), after “paragraph (3)” insert “or (3A)”.
(3) After paragraph (3) insert—
“(3A)
30
A person may send or instigate the sending of electronic mail for the
purposes of direct marketing where—
(a) the direct marketing is solely for the purpose of furthering a
charitable, political or other non-commercial objective of that
person;
(b)
35
that person obtained the contact details of the recipient of the
electronic mail in the course of the recipient expressing an
interest in or offering or providing support for the furtherance
of that objective or a similar objective; and
(c) the recipient has been given a simple means of refusing (free
40
of charge except for the costs of the transmission of the refusal)
the use of their contact details for the purposes of such direct
106 Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill
Part 4—Other provision about digital information 
marketing, at the time that the details were initially collected,
and, where the recipient did not initially refuse the use of the
details, at the time of each subsequent communication.”
83 Direct marketing for the purposes of democratic engagement
(1) The Secretary of State may by regulations provide an exception from a direct 5
marketing provision for a case where communications activity—
(a) is carried out for the purposes of democratic engagement, and
(b) is not directed to individuals under the age of 14.
(2)
10
For the purposes of subsection (1)(a), communications activity is carried out
for the purposes of democratic engagement if—
(a) the activity is carried out—
(i) by, or at the instigation of, an elected representative, and
(ii) for the purposes of the elected representative’s democratic
engagement activities,
(b) the activity is carried out— 15
(i) by, or at the instigation of, a person or organisation included
in a register maintained under section 23 of the Political Parties,
Elections and Referendums Act 2000, and
(ii)
20
for the purposes of the person’s or organisation’s democratic
engagement activities, for the purposes of assisting an elected
representative with their democratic engagement activities or
for the purposes of assisting with a candidate’s campaign for
election as an elected representative,
(c) the activity is carried out—
(i) by, or at the instigation of, a candidate for election as an elected 25
representative, and
(ii) for the purposes of the candidate’s campaign for election,
(d) the activity is carried out—
(i)
30
by, or at the instigation of, a permitted participant in relation
to a referendum, and
(ii) for the purposes of the permitted participant’s campaigning
in connection with the referendum, or
(e) the activity is carried out—
(i)
35
by, or at the instigation of, an accredited campaigner in relation
to a recall petition, and
(ii) for the purposes of the accredited campaigner’s campaigning
in connection with the recall petition.
(3) Regulations under this section may provide for an exception to be subject to
conditions or limitations.
(4) Regulations under this section may— 40
(a) make consequential, supplementary, incidental or transitional provision,
and
(b) make different provision for different purposes.
Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill 107
Part 4—Other provision about digital information 
(5) Before making regulations under this section, the Secretary of State must
consult—
(a) the Information Commissioner, and
(b) such other persons as the Secretary of State considers appropriate.
(6) Before making regulations under this section, the Secretary of State must 5
consider the effect the regulations may have on the privacy of individuals.
(7) Regulations under this section are subject to the affirmative resolution
procedure.
84 Meaning of expressions in section 83
(1) In section 83— 10
“accredited campaigner” has the meaning given in Part 5 of Schedule 3
to the Recall of MPs Act 2015;
“candidate”, in relation to election as an elected representative, has the
15
meaning given by the provision listed in the relevant entry in the
second column of the table in subsection (3);
“communications activity” means—
(a) transmitting, or instigating the transmission of, a
communication, or
(b)
20
using, or instigating the use of, a public electronic
communications service to make a call;
“democratic engagement activities” means activities whose purpose is
to support or promote democratic engagement;
“direct marketing” means the communication (by whatever means) of
25
advertising or marketing material which is directed to particular
individuals;
“direct marketing provision” means any provision of regulations 19 to
24 of the PEC Regulations;
“elected representative” means a person listed in the first column of the
table in subsection (3) and see also subsections (4) and (5);
“permitted participant” has the same meaning as in Part 7 of the Political 30
Parties, Elections and Referendums Act 2000 (referendums) (see section
105 of that Act);
“recall petition” has the same meaning as in the Recall of MPs Act 2015
(see section 1(2) of that Act);
“referendum” means a referendum or other poll held on one or more 35
questions specified in, or in accordance with, an enactment.
(2) In the definition of “communications activity” in subsection (1), “call”,
“communication” and “public electronic communications service” have the
same meaning as in the PEC Regulations (see regulation 2).
(3) This is the table referred to in the definitions of “candidate” and “elected 40
representative” in subsection (1)—
108 Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill
Part 4—Other provision about digital information 
Candidate for election as an elected
representative
Elected representative
section 118A of the Representation of
the People Act 1983
(a)
a member of the House of
Commons
article 84(2) of the National Assembly 5
for Wales (Representation of the
People) Order 2007 (S.I. 2007/236)
(b) a member of the Senedd
article 80(1) of the Scottish Parliament
10
(Elections etc) Order 2015 (S.S.I.
2015/425)
(c)
a member of the Scottish
Parliament
section 118A of the Representation of
the People Act 1983, as applied by
(d)
a member of the Northern
Ireland Assembly
the Northern Ireland Assembly
15
(Elections) Order 2001 (S.I.
2001/2599)
section 118A of the Representation of
the People Act 1983
(e)
an elected member of a local
authority within the meaning of
section 270(1) of the Local
Government Act 1972, namely—
(i) in England, a county 20
council, a district council,
a London borough
council or a parish
council;
(ii) in Wales, a county 25
council, a county
borough council or a
community council;
30
section 118A of the Representation of
the People Act 1983, as applied by
(f)
an elected mayor of a local
authority within the meaning of
the Local Authorities (Mayoral
Part 1A or 2 of the Local
Government Act 2000 Elections) (England and Wales)
Regulations 2007 (S.I. 2007/1024)
35
section 118A of the Representation of
the People Act 1983, as applied by
(g)
a mayor for the area of a
combined authority established
the Combined Authorities (Mayoral
Elections) Order 2017 (S.I. 2017/67)
under section 103 of the Local
Democracy, Economic
Development and Construction
Act 2009
section 118A of the Representation of 40
the People Act 1983
(h)
the Mayor of London or an
elected member of the London
Assembly
Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill 109
Part 4—Other provision about digital information 
Candidate for election as an elected
representative
Elected representative
section 118A of the Representation of
the People Act 1983
(i)
an elected member of the
5
Common Council of the City of
London
section 118A of the Representation of
the People Act 1983
(j)
an elected member of the
Council of the Isles of Scilly
section 118A of the Representation of
the People Act 1983
(k)
an elected member of a council
10
constituted under section 2 of
the Local Government etc
(Scotland) Act 1994
section 130(3A) of the Electoral Law
Act (Northern Ireland) 1962 (c. 9
(N.I.))
(l)
an elected member of a district
council within the meaning of
15
the Local Government Act
(Northern Ireland) 1972 (c. 9
(N.I.))
article 3 of the Police and Crime
Commissioner Elections Order 2012
(S.I. 2012/1917)
(m) a police and crime commissioner
(4) For the purposes of the definition of “elected representative” in subsection 20
(1), a person who is —
(a) a member of the House of Commons immediately before Parliament
is dissolved,
(b)
25
a member of the Senedd immediately before Senedd Cymru is
dissolved,
(c) a member of the Scottish Parliament immediately before that
Parliament is dissolved, or
(d) a member of the Northern Ireland Assembly immediately before that
Assembly is dissolved,
is to be treated as if the person were such a member until the end of the 30
fourth day after the day on which the subsequent general election in relation
to that Parliament or Assembly is held.
(5) For the purposes of the definition of “elected representative” in subsection
35
(1), a person who is an elected member of the Common Council of the City
of London and whose term of office comes to an end at the end of the day
preceding the annual Wardmotes is to be treated as if the person were such
a member until the end of the fourth day after the day on which those
Wardmotes are held.
85 Duty to notify the Commissioner of unlawful direct marketing
(1) The PEC Regulations are amended as follows. 40
110 Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill
Part 4—Other provision about digital information 
(2) After regulation 26 insert—
“26A Duty to notify Commissioner of unlawful direct marketing
(1) A provider of a public electronic communications service must notify
5
the Commissioner of any reasonable grounds the provider has for
suspecting that a person is contravening or has contravened any of
the direct marketing regulations in the course of using the service.
(2) A provider of a public electronic communications network must notify
the Commissioner of any reasonable grounds the provider has for
10
suspecting that a person is contravening or has contravened any of
the direct marketing regulations in the course of using the network
or using a public electronic communication service provided by means
of the network.
(3) A notification under this regulation must be given within the period
15
of 28 days beginning with the day on which the reasonable grounds
for suspicion come to the attention of the provider.
(4) “Direct marketing regulations” means regulations 19 to 22.
26B Fixed penalty for failure to comply with regulation 26A
(1) If a provider of a public electronic communications service or public
20
electronic communications network fails to comply with regulation
26A, the Commissioner may issue a fixed monetary penalty notice in
respect of the failure.
(2) The amount of a fixed monetary penalty under this regulation shall
be £1,000.
(3)
25
Before serving a fixed monetary penalty notice, the Commissioner
must serve the provider with a notice of intent.
(4) The notice of intent must—
(a) state the name and address of the provider;
(b) state the nature of the failure;
(c) state the amount of the fixed monetary penalty;
(d) include a statement informing the provider of the opportunity 30
to discharge liability for the fixed monetary penalty;
(e) indicate the date on which the Commissioner proposes to serve
the fixed monetary penalty notice; and
(f)
35
inform the provider that the provider may make written
representations in relation to the proposal to serve a fixed
monetary penalty notice within the period of 21 days beginning
with the day the notice of intent is served.
(5) A provider may discharge liability for the fixed monetary penalty if
40
the provider pays to the Commissioner the amount of £800 within the
period of 21 days beginning with the day the notice of intent is served.
Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill 111
Part 4—Other provision about digital information 
(6) The Commissioner may not serve a fixed monetary penalty notice
until the period within which representations may be made has
expired.
(7) The fixed monetary penalty notice must state—
(a) the name and address of the provider; 5
(b) details of the notice of intent served on the provider;
(c) whether there have been any written representations;
(d) details of any early payment discounts;
(e)
10
the grounds on which the Commissioner imposes the fixed
monetary penalty;
(f) the date by which the fixed monetary penalty is to be paid;
and
(g) details of, including the time limit for, the provider’s right of
appeal against the imposition of the fixed monetary penalty.
(8) A provider on whom a fixed monetary penalty notice is served may 15
appeal to the Tribunal against the issue of the fixed monetary penalty
notice.
(9) Any sum received by the Commissioner by virtue of this regulation
must be paid into the Consolidated Fund.
(10) In England and Wales, the fixed monetary penalty is recoverable— 20
(a) if the county court so orders, as if it were payable under an
order of that court;
(b) if the High Court so orders, as if it were payable under an
order of that court.
(11) In Scotland, the fixed monetary penalty may be enforced in the same 25
manner as an extract registered decree arbitral bearing a warrant for
execution issued by the sheriff court of any sheriffdom in Scotland.
(12) In Northern Ireland, the fixed monetary penalty is recoverable—
(a)
30
if a county court so orders, as if it were payable under an order
of that court;
(b) if the High Court so orders, as if it were payable under an
order of that court.
(13) The Secretary of State may by regulations made by statutory instrument
35
amend this regulation so as to substitute a different amount for the
amount for the time being specified in paragraph (2) or (5).
(14) A statutory instrument containing regulations under this regulation
may not be made unless a draft of the instrument has been laid before,
and approved by a resolution of, each House of Parliament.
26C Guidance in relation to regulation 26A
(1) The Commissioner must produce and publish guidance about what 40
may constitute reasonable grounds for suspecting that a person is
112 Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill
Part 4—Other provision about digital information 
contravening or has contravened any of the direct marketing
regulations in the course of using a public electronic communications
service or public electronic communications network.
(2) The Commissioner may—
(a) alter and replace guidance produced under this regulation, and 5
(b) must publish any altered or replacement guidance.
(3) Before producing guidance under this regulation (including any altered
or replacement guidance), the Commissioner must consult—
(a) the Secretary of State,
(b) OFCOM, 10
(c) providers of public electronic communications networks,
(d) providers of public electronic communications services, and
(e) such other persons as the Commissioner considers appropriate.
(4)
15
The Commissioner must have regard to guidance under this regulation
in determining whether to issue a fixed monetary penalty notice under
regulation 26B.
(5) “Direct marketing regulations” means regulations 19 to 22.”
(3) In regulation 5C (personal data breach: fixed monetary penalty)—
(a) in paragraph (10)—
(i) omit “and Northern Ireland”, and 20
(ii) in paragraph (a), for “a county court” substitute “the county
court”, and
(b) after paragraph (11) insert—
“(12) In Northern Ireland, the penalty is recoverable—
(a) if a county court so orders, as if it were payable under 25
an order of that court;
(b) if the High Court so orders, as if it were payable under
an order of that court.”
86 Commissioner’s enforcement powers
(1) The PEC Regulations are amended as follows. 30
(2) In regulation 5 (security of public electronic communications services), omit
paragraph (6).
(3) Omit regulation 5B (personal data breach: audit).
(4)
35
In regulation 5C (personal data breach: fixed monetary penalty) after
paragraph (12) (inserted by section 85 of this Act) insert—
“(13) The Secretary of State may by regulations made by statutory instrument
amend this regulation so as to substitute a different amount for the
amount for the time being specified in paragraph (2) or (5).
Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill 113
Part 4—Other provision about digital information 
(14) A statutory instrument containing regulations under this regulation
may not be made unless a draft of the instrument has been laid before,
and approved by a resolution of, each House of Parliament.”
(5) For regulation 31 substitute—
“31 Information Commissioner’s enforcement powers 5
(1) Schedule 1 provides for certain provisions of Parts 5 to 7 of the Data
Protection Act 2018 to apply with modifications for the purposes of
enforcing these Regulations.
(2)
10
In regulations 32 and 33, “enforcement functions” means the functions
of the Information Commissioner under those provisions, as applied
by that Schedule.”
(6) Omit regulation 31A (third party information notices).
(7) Omit regulation 31B (appeals against third party information notices).
(8) For Schedule 1 substitute the Schedule set out in Schedule 10.
(9) In paragraph 58(1) of Schedule 20 to the 2018 Act (transitional provision 15
relating to the PEC Regulations) for “regulations 2, 31 and 31B of, and
Schedule 1 to,” substitute “regulation 2 of”.
Trust services
87 The eIDAS Regulation
In sections 88 to 91, “the eIDAS Regulation” means Regulation (EU) No. 20
910/2014 of the European Parliament and the Council of 23 July 2014 on
electronic identification and trust services for electronic transactions in the
internal market.
88 Recognition of EU conformity assessment bodies
In Chapter 3 of the eIDAS Regulation (trust services), after Article 24A insert— 25
“Article 24B
Recognition of EU conformity assessment bodies
For the purposes of Articles 20(1), 21 and 24(1)(d), a body is to
30
be treated as if it were a conformity assessment body in relation
to a description of trust services provider (and trust service) if
it is a conformity assessment body in relation to that description
of provider (and service) for the purposes of the equivalent EU
law.”
89 Removal of recognition of EU standards etc
(1) The Secretary of State may by regulations— 35
114 Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill
Part 4—Other provision about digital information 
(a) amend Article 24A of the eIDAS Regulation (recognition of EU
standards etc for qualified trust services) so as to remove circumstances
in which something is to be treated as qualified under that Regulation
5
for the purposes of a provision or measure specified in paragraph 1
of that Article;
(b) revoke that Article;
(c) revoke Article 24B of the eIDAS Regulation (recognition of EU
conformity assessment bodies);
(d)
10
revoke Article 51 of the eIDAS Regulation (transitional measures for
electronic signatures);
(e) amend a provision listed in subsection (3) so as to remove a reference
to a trust service provider established in the EU;
(f) amend a provision listed in subsection (4) so as to remove a reference
to European standards or provisions of equivalent EU law.
(2) The power under subsection (1)(a) includes power to amend or remove an 15
assumption in Article 24A(2) of the eIDAS Regulation.
(3) The provisions mentioned in subsection (1)(e) are—
(a) Article 13(1) of the eIDAS Regulation;
(b) Articles 2(1)(a) and 4(1)(a) of the Implementing Decision.
(4) The provisions mentioned in subsection (1)(f) are— 20
(a) Article 24(2)(b) of the eIDAS Regulation;
(b) Articles 2(2)(c)(7) and 4(2)(c)(7) of the Implementing Decision.
(5) Regulations under this section may—
(a) include transitional provision or savings, and
(b) make different provision for different purposes, including for the 25
purposes of different provisions of the eIDAS Regulation.
(6) A statutory instrument containing regulations under this section is subject to
the negative resolution procedure.
(7)
30
In this section, “the Implementing Decision” means Commission Implementing
Decision (EU) 2015/1506 laying down specifications relating to formats of
advance electronic signatures and advance seals to be recognised by public
sector bodies pursuant to Articles 27(5) and 37(5) of the eIDAS Regulation.
90 Recognition of overseas trust products
(1) The eIDAS Regulation is amended as follows.
Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill 115
Part 4—Other provision about digital information 
(2) In Chapter 3 of the eIDAS Regulation, after Article 45 insert—
“Section 9
Recognition of overseas trust services
Article 45A
Legal effects of overseas electronic signatures etc 5
1. The Secretary of State may by regulations provide that, for the
purposes of Articles 25(2), 35(2), 41(2) and 43(2), an overseas trust
product of a specified description is to be treated as qualified.
2. In this Article—
“overseas”, in relation to a trust product, means provided by a 10
person established in a country or territory outside the United
Kingdom;
“specified” means specified by regulations under this Article;
15
“trust product” means an electronic signature, an electronic seal,
an electronic time stamp or an electronic registered delivery
service.
3. The Secretary of State may not make regulations under this Article
specifying a description of overseas trust product unless satisfied that
20
the reliability of such a product is at least equivalent to the reliability
of a comparable trust product that is qualified.
4. When making regulations under this Article in relation to a description
of overseas trust product, the Secretary of State must have regard to
(among other things) the law in the other country or territory relevant
to that description of product and related trust services.
Article 45B 25
Overseas signatures and seals in public service
1. The Secretary of State may by regulations provide that an overseas
electronic signature of a specified description is to be treated—
(a)
30
for the purposes of Article 27(1), as an advanced electronic
signature that complies with the Implementing Decision;
(b) for the purposes of Article 27(2), as an advanced electronic
signature based on a qualified certificate for electronic signature,
or a qualified signature, that complies with the Implementing
Decision.
2. The Secretary of State may by regulations provide that an overseas 35
electronic seal of a specified description is to be treated—
(a) for the purposes of Article 37(1), as an advanced electronic seal
that complies with the Implementing Decision;
116 Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill
Part 4—Other provision about digital information 
(b) for the purposes of Article 37(2), as an advanced electronic seal
based on a qualified certificate for electronic seal, or a qualified
seal, that complies with the Implementing Decision.
3. In this Article—
“the Implementing Decision” means Commission Implementing 5
Decision (EU) 2015/1506 laying down specifications relating to
formats of advanced electronic signatures and advanced seals
to be recognised by public sector bodies;
10
“overseas”, in relation to an electronic signature or electronic
seal, means provided by a person established in a country or
territory outside the United Kingdom;
“specified” means specified by regulations made under this
Article.
4.
15
The Secretary of State may not make regulations under point (a) or
(b) of paragraph 1 or point (a) or (b) of paragraph 2 specifying a
description of overseas electronic signature or overseas electronic seal
unless satisfied that the reliability of such a signature or seal is at least
equivalent to the reliability of a signature or seal described in that
point.
5. When making regulations under this Article in relation to a description 20
of overseas electronic signature or overseas electronic seal, the Secretary
of State must have regard to (among other things) the law in the other
country or territory relevant to that description of signature or seal
and related trust services.
Article 45C 25
Regulations under this Section
1. Before making regulations under Article 45A or 45B, the Secretary of
State must consult the supervisory body.
2. Regulations under Article 45A or 45B—
(a) may describe something by (among other things) describing 30
something that meets a condition specified in the regulations or
is provided by a person who meets such a condition, and
(b) may include a condition referring to (among other things) the
35
law of the other country or territory or a standard or other
document, including the law, standard or other document as
amended from time to time.
3. Regulations under Article 45A or 45B may—
(a) make different provision for different purposes, including for
the purposes of different provisions of this Regulation, and
(b) include transitional or transitory provision or savings. 40
4. Regulations under Article 45A or 45B are to be made by statutory
instrument.
Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill 117
Part 4—Other provision about digital information 
5. A statutory instrument containing regulations under Article 45A or
45B is subject to annulment in pursuance of either House of
Parliament.”
(3)
5
In Article 3(21) (definition of “product”), at the end insert “(except in the
expression “trust product”)”.
91 Co-operation between supervisory authority and overseas authorities
(1) Article 18 of the eIDAS Regulation (co-operation with EU authorities) is
amended as follows.
(2) In the heading, for “EU” substitute “overseas”.
(3) In paragraph 1, for “public authority in the EU” substitute “designated 10
overseas authority”.
(4) In paragraph 2, for “other than in accordance with the data protection
legislation” substitute “if the processing would contravene the data protection
15
legislation (but in determining whether processing would do so, take into
account the power conferred by that paragraph)”.
(5) After paragraph 2 insert—
“3. In this Article—
“designated” means designated by regulations made by the
Secretary of State that are in force;
“overseas authority” means a person, or description of person, 20
with functions relating to the regulation or supervision of trust
services outside the United Kingdom.
4. Before making regulations under this Article, the Secretary of State
must consult the supervisory body.
5. Regulations under this Article may include transitional or transitory 25
provision or savings.
6. Regulations under this Article are to be made by statutory instrument.
7. A statutory instrument containing regulations under this Article is
subject to annulment in pursuance of either House of Parliament.”
Sharing of information 30
92 Disclosure of information to improve public service delivery to undertakings
(1) Section 35 of the Digital Economy Act 2017 (disclosure of information to
improve public service delivery) is amended as follows.
(2) In subsection (9)—
(a) in paragraph (a), for “or households” substitute “, households or 35
undertakings”, and
118 Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill
Part 4—Other provision about digital information 
(b) in paragraph (b), for “or households” substitute “, households or
undertakings”.
(3) In subsection (10)—
(a) the words after “its purpose” become paragraph (a), and
(b) at the end of that paragraph, insert “, or 5
(b) the assisting of undertakings in connection with any
trade, business or charitable purpose.”
(4) After subsection (12) insert—
“(13) In this section “undertaking” means—
(a) any person, other than a public authority, carrying on a trade 10
or business, whether or not with a view to profit, or
(b) any body, or the trustees of a trust, established for charitable
purposes only.
(14)
15
In this section, in so far as it forms the law in Scotland and Northern
Ireland, “charitable purpose” has the same meaning as it has in the
law of England and Wales (see section 2 of the Charities Act 2011).”
93 Implementation of law enforcement information-sharing agreements
(1) The Secretary of State may by regulations make such provision as the Secretary
20
of State considers appropriate for the purpose of, or in connection with,
implementing an international agreement so far as relating to the sharing of
information for law enforcement purposes, as it has effect from time to time.
(2) Regulations under this section may—
(a) make different provision for different purposes, and
(b) make transitional, transitory or saving provision.
(3) Subject to subsections (4) and (5), regulations under this section may provide 25
that sharing of information in accordance with the regulations does not breach
any restriction on the sharing of information (however imposed).
(4) Regulations under this section do not require or authorise processing of
30
personal data that would contravene the data protection legislation (but in
determining whether processing of personal data would do so, take into
account a duty imposed, or power conferred, by the regulations).
(5) Regulations under this section do not require or authorise the making of a
disclosure which is prohibited by any of Parts 1 to 7 or Chapter 1 of Part 9
of the Investigatory Powers Act 2016.
(6) Regulations under this section are subject to the negative resolution procedure 35
(7) In this section—
“the data protection legislation” has the same meaning as in the 2018
Act (see section 3(9) of that Act);
40
“law enforcement purposes” means the prevention, investigation,
detection or prosecution of criminal offences or the execution of
Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill 119
Part 4—Other provision about digital information 
criminal penalties, including the safeguarding against, and the
prevention of, threats to public security;
“personal data” has the same meaning as in the 2018 Act (see section
3(2) of that Act);
“processing” has the same meaning as in the 2018 Act (see section 3(4) 5
of that Act).
Registers of births and deaths
94 Form in which registers of births and deaths are to be kept
(1) The Births and Deaths Registration Act 1953 is amended as follows.
(2) For section 25 (provision of registers, etc, by Registrar General) substitute— 10
“25 Form in which registers are to be kept, etc
(1) Registers of live-births, still-births and deaths must be kept in such
form as the Registrar General may reasonably require.
(2)
15
The Registrar General may, in particular, require any such register to
be kept in a form that secures that any information entered in the
register by a registrar—
(a) in the case of a register of live-births or of deaths, is available
to the superintendent registrar and to the Registrar General
immediately after the entry has been made, and
(b) in the case of a register of still-births, is available to the 20
Registrar General immediately after the entry has been made.
(3) In a case where a register is kept in such form as is mentioned in
subsection (2), any information in the register which is available to
25
the superintendent registrar or Registrar General is to be regarded as
held by that person (as well as by the registrar) in connection with
that person’s functions.
(4) The Registrar General—
(a) may provide anything which the Registrar General considers
30
appropriate for the registers mentioned in subsection (1) to be
kept in the form required under that subsection, and
(b) must maintain anything provided under paragraph (a).
(5) The Registrar General must also provide the forms required for the
purposes of this Act for making certified copies of entries in registers.”
(3) Omit the following provisions—
(a) section 26 (quarterly returns to be made by registrar to superintendent 35
registrar);
(b) section 27 (quarterly returns by superintendent registrar to Registrar
General);
(c) section 28 (custody of registers, etc).
120 Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill
Part 4—Other provision about digital information 
95 Provision of equipment and facilities by local authorities
In the Registration Service Act 1953, after section 11 insert—
“11A Provision of equipment and facilities by local authorities
(1)
5
At each register office provided for the superintendent registrar of a
district, the council which employs the superintendent registrar shall,
subject to the provisions of the local scheme, provide and maintain
such equipment or facilities as the Registrar General reasonably
considers to be necessary for the performance of the superintendent
registrar’s functions.
(2) At each office and each station for a sub-district of a registrar, the 10
council which employs the registrar shall, subject to the provisions of
the local scheme, provide and maintain such equipment or facilities
as the Registrar General reasonably considers to be necessary for the
performance of the registrar’s functions.”
96 Requirements to sign register 15
(1) The Births and Deaths Registration Act 1953 is amended as follows.
(2) After section 38A insert—
“38B Requirements to sign register
(1)
20
Where any register of births or register of deaths is required to be
kept under this Act otherwise than in hard copy form, the Minister
may by regulations provide that—
(a) a person’s duty under this Act to sign the register at any time
is to have effect as a duty to comply with specified
requirements at that time, and
(b) a person who complies with those requirements is to be treated 25
for the purposes of this Act as having signed the register at
that time and, in the case of a duty to sign the register in the
presence of the registrar, to have done so in the presence of
the registrar,
and accordingly, in such a case, the entry in the register is to be taken 30
for the purposes of this Act to have been signed by the person.
(2) The provision that may be made by regulations under this section
includes, among other things—
(a)
35
provision requiring a person to sign something other than the
register;
(b) provision requiring a person to provide specified evidence of
identity in such form and manner as may be specified.
(3) In this section “specified” means specified in regulations under this
section.”
Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill 121
Part 4—Other provision about digital information 
(3) In section 39A (regulations made by the Minister: further provisions), after
subsection (5) insert—
“(6) A statutory instrument that contains (whether alone or with other
5
provision) regulations made by the Minister under section 38B may
not be made unless a draft of the instrument has been laid before, and
approved by a resolution of, each House of Parliament.”
97 Treatment of existing registers and records
(1) The repeal of section 28 of the Births and Deaths Registration Act 1953 by
section 94 above does not affect—
(a) the requirement under section 28(2) of that Act for every 10
superintendent registrar (“S”) to keep with the records of S’s office
any registers of live-births or of deaths which are in S’s custody
immediately before the coming into force of that repeal, or
(b)
15
the requirement under section 28(4) of that Act for the Registrar
General to keep in the General Register Office—
(i) any certified copies or information sent or provided under
section 27 of that Act (quarterly returns by superintendent
registrar to Registrar General), or
(ii)
20
any registers of still-births that were forwarded to the Registrar
General before the coming into force of that repeal.
(2) Any register of live-births or of deaths which, immediately before the coming
into force of this section, is in the custody of a registrar and is unfilled is, as
soon as is reasonably practicable after the coming into force of this section,
25
to be delivered to the superintendent registrar (“S”) to be kept by S with the
records of S’s office.
(3) Any register of still-births which, immediately before the coming into force
of this section, is in the custody of a registrar and is unfilled is, as soon as is
reasonably practicable after the coming into force of this section, to be
30
forwarded to the Registrar General to be kept in the General Register Office
in such order and manner as the Registrar General thinks fit.
(4) The Registrar General may dispose of—
(a) any certified copies held by the Registrar General of entries in any
register of still-births forwarded to the Registrar General under section
35
28(3) of the Births and Deaths Registration Act 1953 or subsection (3)
above, or
(b) any information contained in those entries which is held by the
Registrar General in electronic form by virtue of section 27 of that Act.
(5) Where, at any time during the period mentioned in subsection (6), a copy
40
has been kept otherwise than in hard copy form of any register of births or
register of deaths kept for a sub-district under the Births and Deaths
Registration Act 1953—
122 Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill
Part 4—Other provision about digital information 
(a) that copy is to be treated, on and after the day on which section 94
comes into force, as the register kept for the sub-district for the
purposes of that Act,
(b)
5
on and after that day, the register is to be treated for the purposes of
section 25(3) of that Act as having been kept in the form in which the
copy was kept,
(c) where before that day a person signed any entry in the register, the
entry is to continue, on and after that day, to be regarded for the
purposes of that Act as having been signed by the person, and
(d) the Registrar General may dispose of— 10
(i) any certified copies held by the Registrar General of entries in
the register, or
(ii) any information contained in those entries which is held by
15
the Registrar General in electronic form by virtue of section 27
of that Act.
(6) The period referred to in subsection (5) is the period—
(a) beginning with 1 July 2009, and
(b) ending immediately before the day on which section 94 comes into
force.
(7) Expressions used in this section and in the Births and Deaths Registration 20
Act 1953 have the same meaning in this section as in that Act.
98 Minor and consequential amendments
Schedule 11 contains minor and consequential amendments.
Information standards for health and social care
99 Information standards for health and adult social care in England 25
Schedule 12 makes provision about information standards for health and
adult social care in England (under Part 9 of the Health and Social Care Act
2012) and information technology.
PART 5
REGULATION AND OVERSIGHT 30
Information Commission
100 The Information Commission
(1) The 2018 Act is amended as follows.
Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill 123
Part 5—Regulation and oversight 
(2) After section 114 insert—
“The Information Commission
114A The Information Commission
(1) A body corporate called the Information Commission is established.
(2) Schedule 12A makes further provision about the Commission.” 5
(3) In section 3 (terms relating to the processing of personal data), after subsection
(8) insert—
“(8A) “The Commission” means the Information Commission (see section
114A).”
(4) In section 206 (index of defined expressions), in the Table, at the appropriate 10
place insert—
“the Commission section 3”.
(5) Schedule 13—
(a) inserts Schedule 12A to the 2018 Act, and
(b) makes transitional provision relating to the person who holds the 15
office of Information Commissioner immediately before the day on
which Schedule 13 comes into force.
101 Abolition of the office of Information Commissioner
(1) The office of Information Commissioner is abolished.
(2) Accordingly, the 2018 Act is amended as follows. 20
(3) In section 3 (terms relating to the processing of personal data) omit subsection
(8).
(4) Omit section 114 (the Information Commissioner) and the italic heading before
that section.
(5) In section 206 (index of defined expressions), in the Table, omit the entry for 25
the Commissioner.
(6) In section 214(1) (extent)—
(a) omit “and” at the end of paragraph (a), and
(b) omit paragraph (b).
(7) Omit Schedule 12 (the Information Commissioner). 30
102 Transfer of functions to the Information Commission
(1) The functions of the Information Commissioner are transferred to the
Information Commission.
124 Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill
Part 5—Regulation and oversight 
(2) So far as is appropriate in consequence of subsection (1), a reference to the
Information Commissioner (however expressed) in an enactment or other
document (whenever passed or made) is to be treated as a reference to the
Information Commission.
(3) In this section, “enactment” includes— 5
(a) this Act,
(b) an enactment comprised in subordinate legislation (as defined in
section 21 of the Interpretation Act 1978),
(c)
10
an enactment comprised in, or in an instrument made under, a Measure
or Act of Senedd Cymru,
(d) an enactment comprised in, or in an instrument made under, an Act
of the Scottish Parliament,
(e) an enactment comprised in, or in an instrument made under, Northern
Ireland legislation, and
(f) retained direct EU legislation. 15
103 Transfer of property etc to the Information Commission
(1) The Secretary of State may make a scheme for the transfer of property, rights
and liabilities from the Information Commissioner to the Information
Commission.
(2) The things that may be transferred under a transfer scheme include— 20
(a) property, rights and liabilities that could not otherwise be transferred;
(b) property acquired, and rights and liabilities arising, after the making
of the scheme.
(3) A transfer scheme may—
(a) make provision about the continuing effect of things done by the 25
Information Commissioner in respect of anything transferred;
(b) make provision about the continuation of things (including legal
proceedings) in the process of being done by, on behalf of or in relation
to the Information Commissioner in respect of anything transferred;
(c) make provision for references to the Information Commissioner in an 30
instrument or other document in respect of anything transferred under
a transfer scheme to be treated as references to the Information
Commission;
(d)
35
make provision which is the same as or similar to the Transfer of
Undertakings (Protection of Employment) Regulations 2006 (S.I.
2006/246);
(e) make other consequential, supplementary, incidental or transitional
provision.
(4) A transfer scheme may provide—
(a) for modifications by agreement; 40
(b) for modifications to have effect from the date when the original scheme
came into effect.
Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill 125
Part 5—Regulation and oversight 
(5) In this section, references to rights and liabilities include rights and liabilities
relating to a contract of employment.
Oversight of biometric data
104 Oversight of retention and use of biometric material
(1) The office of Commissioner for the Retention and Use of Biometric Material 5
is abolished.
(2) Part 1 of the Protection of Freedoms Act 2012 (regulation of biometric data)
is amended in accordance with subsections (3) to (6).
(3)
10
For the heading before section 20 substitute “Functions of the Investigatory
Powers Commissioner”.
(4) In section 20 (appointment and functions of the Commissioner for the
Retention and Use of Biometric Material)—
(a) in the heading, omit “Appointment and”,
(b) omit subsection (1),
(c) after that subsection insert— 15
“(1A) In this section, “the Commissioner” means the Investigatory
Powers Commissioner (as defined in section 263(1) of the
Investigatory Powers Act 2016).”,
(d) omit subsections (6) to (8),
(e) in subsection (9)— 20
(i) after “63G” insert “of the Police and Criminal Evidence Act
1984”, and
(ii) at the end insert “(“the section 63D functions”)”,
(f) omit subsections (10) and (11), and
(g) at the end insert— 25
“(12) Section 229(6) and (7) of the Investigatory Powers Act 2016
(duty not to act contrary to public interest etc) apply to the
exercise of functions under this section and the section 63D
30
functions as they apply to the exercise of functions under that
Act.
(13) Errors identified by the Commissioner in carrying out functions
under this section or the section 63D functions are not relevant
errors for the purposes of section 231 of the Investigatory
Powers Act 2016 (error reporting).
(14) The Commissioner’s annual report under section 234 of the 35
Investigatory Powers Act 2016 must include information about
the carrying out of the Commissioner’s functions under this
section and the section 63D functions.”
(5) Omit section 21 (reports by Commissioner).
126 Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill
Part 5—Regulation and oversight 
(6) In section 22 (guidance on making national security determinations)—
(a) in subsection (4)—
(i) for “the guidance, or revising guidance already given” substitute
“guidance or revised guidance under this section”, and
(ii) for “Commissioner for the Retention and Use of Biometric 5
Material” substitute “Investigatory Powers Commissioner”,
(b) in subsection (5)—
(i) after “giving guidance” insert “or revised guidance”,
(ii) omit “or revising guidance already given,”
(iii) in paragraph (a), for “revisions” substitute “revised guidance”, 10
and
(iv) in paragraph (b), for “revisions to the guidance” substitute
“revised guidance”,
(c)
15
in subsection (6), for “make the revisions to the guidance” substitute
“revised guidance”,
(d) in subsection (7), for “revisions to guidance, come” substitute “revised
guidance, comes”,
(e) in subsection (9), for “given or revised” substitute “or revised guidance
given”, and
(f) at the end insert— 20
“(10) In this section, “the Investigatory Powers Commissioner” has
the meaning given in section 263(1) of the Investigatory Powers
Act 2016.”
(7)
25
Part 5 of the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 (questioning and treatment
of persons by police) is amended in accordance with subsections (8) to (10).
(8) In section 63AB (National DNA Database Strategy Board)—
(a) in subsection (4), for “Commissioner for the Retention and Use of
Biometric Material” substitute “Investigatory Powers Commissioner”,
(b)
30
in subsection (5), for “Commissioner for the Retention and Use of
Biometric Material” substitute “Investigatory Powers Commissioner”,
and
(c) in subsection (13) (inserted by section 106 of this Act), at the
appropriate place insert—
35
““the Investigatory Powers Commissioner” has the meaning given
in section 263(1) of the Investigatory Powers Act 2016;”.
(9) In section 63F(5)(c) (retention of section 63D material: persons arrested for or
charged with a qualifying offence), for “Commissioner for the Retention and
Use of Biometric Material” substitute “Investigatory Powers Commissioner”.
(10)
40
In section 63G (retention of section 63D material by virtue of section 63F(5):
consent of Commissioner)—
(a) in subsection (1), for “Commissioner for the Retention and Use of
Biometric Material” substitute “Investigatory Powers Commissioner
(“the Commissioner”)”, and
Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill 127
Part 5—Regulation and oversight 
(b) in subsection (10), after “section—” insert—
““the Investigatory Powers Commissioner” has the meaning given
in section 263(1) of the Investigatory Powers Act 2016,”.
(11) In consequence of the amendments made by this section—
(a) in Part 3 of Schedule 1 to the House of Commons Disqualification Act 5
1975 (other disqualifying offices), omit “Commissioner for the Retention
and Use of Biometric Material”,
(b) in Part 3 of Schedule 1 to the Northern Ireland Assembly
10
Disqualification Act 1975 (other disqualifying offices), omit
“Commissioner for the Retention and Use of Biometric Material”, and
(c) in the Scottish Biometrics Commissioner Act 2020 (asp 8)—
(i) in section 2(2) (functions), for “Commissioner for the Retention
and Use of Biometric Material” substitute “Investigatory Powers
Commissioner”, and
(ii) in section 3 (power to work with others), omit paragraph (i) 15
and after that paragraph insert—
“(ia) the Investigatory Powers Commissioner
(as defined in section 263(1) of the
Investigatory Powers Act 2016),”.
105 Removal of provision for regulation of CCTV etc 20
(1) The office of Surveillance Camera Commissioner is abolished.
(2) In the Protection of Freedoms Act 2012, omit Chapter 1 of Part 2 (regulation
of CCTV and other surveillance technology).
(3) In consequence of that repeal—
(a) in Part 3 of Schedule 1 to the House of Commons Disqualification Act 25
1975 (other disqualifying offices), omit “Surveillance Camera
Commissioner”;
(b) in Part 6 of Schedule 1 to the Freedom of Information Act 2000 (public
authorities), omit “The Surveillance Camera Commissioner”.
106 Oversight of biometrics databases 30
(1) Section 63AB of the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 (National DNA
Database Strategy Board) is amended as follows.
(2) For the heading substitute “Oversight of biometrics databases”.
(3) In subsection (1)—
(a) for “National DNA Database Strategy Board” substitute “Strategy 35
Board (“the Board”)”,
(b) after “of” insert “—
(a) ”, and
(c) at the end insert “, and
128 Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill
Part 5—Regulation and oversight 
(b) a database of fingerprints—
(i) taken from a person under a power conferred by this
Part of this Act, or
(ii)
5
taken by the police, with the consent of the person
from whom they were taken, in connection with the
investigation of an offence by the police.”
(4) After that subsection insert—
“(1A) The Board is to be known as the Forensic Information Database
Strategy Board.”
(5) In subsection (2)— 10
(a) omit “National DNA Database Strategy”,
(b) for “guidance about” substitute “one or more codes of practice about—
(a) the erasure of personal data from a database listed in
subsection (1),
(b) ”, and 15
(c) at the end insert “, and
(c) the destruction of other material from which biometric
data contained in a database listed in subsection (1) is
derived.”
(6) In subsection (3), for “guidance” substitute “a code of practice”. 20
(7) In subsection (4), omit “National DNA Database Strategy”.
(8) In subsection (5), omit “National DNA Database Strategy”.
(9) In subsection (6), omit “National DNA Database Strategy”.
(10) In subsection (7), omit “National DNA Database Strategy”.
(11) At the end insert— 25
“(10) The Secretary of State may by regulations made by statutory
instrument—
(a) change the databases which the Board is required to oversee
by—
(i) adding a database operated for policing purposes which 30
consists entirely or mainly of biometric data, or
(ii) removing a database;
(b) rename the Board;
(c)
35
require or authorise the Board to issue a code of practice or
guidance.
(11) Regulations under subsection (10) may—
(a) amend this section;
(b) make different provision for different purposes;
(c) make consequential, transitional, transitory or saving provision.
Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill 129
Part 5—Regulation and oversight 
(12) A statutory instrument containing regulations under this section may
not be made unless a draft of the instrument has been laid before, and
approved by a resolution of, each House of Parliament.
(13) In this section—
“biometric data” means personal data resulting from specific 5
technical processing relating to the physical, physiological or
behavioural characteristics of an individual, which allows or
confirms the unique identification of that individual, such as
facial images or dactyloscopic data;
“personal data” has the same meaning as in the Data Protection 10
Act 2018 (see section 3(2) of that Act).”
PART 6
FINAL PROVISIONS
107 Power to make consequential amendments
(1) The Secretary of State may by regulations make provision that is consequential 15
on any provision made by this Act.
(2) Regulations under this section—
(a) may make different provision for different purposes;
(b) may include transitional, transitory or saving provision;
(c) may amend, repeal or revoke any provision made by primary 20
legislation.
(3) The reference in subsection (2)(c) to provision made by primary legislation
is—
(a)
25
where the amendment, repeal or revocation is consequential on section
100, 101 or 102(1) or Schedule 13, a reference to provision made by
primary legislation whenever passed or made (including this Act),
and
(b) in any other case, a reference to provision made by primary legislation
30
passed or made before the end of the Session in which this Act is
passed.
(4) Regulations under this section that amend, repeal or revoke primary legislation
are subject to the affirmative resolution procedure.
(5) Any other regulations under this section are subject to the negative resolution
procedure.
(6) In this section, “primary legislation” means— 35
(a) an Act of Parliament;
(b) an Act of the Scottish Parliament;
(c) a Measure or Act of Senedd Cymru;
(d) Northern Ireland legislation;
(e) retained direct principal EU legislation. 40
130 Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill
Part 6—Final provisions 
108 Regulations
(1) Regulations under this Act are to be made by statutory instrument.
(2) Where regulations under this Act are subject to “the affirmative resolution
5
procedure” the regulations may not be made unless a draft of the statutory
instrument containing them has been laid before Parliament and approved
by a resolution of each House of Parliament.
(3) Where regulations under this Act are subject to “the negative resolution
procedure” the statutory instrument containing the regulations is subject to
annulment in pursuance of a resolution of either House of Parliament.
(4) Any provision that may be included in regulations under this Act subject to 10
the negative resolution procedure may be made by regulations subject to the
affirmative resolution procedure.
109 Interpretation
In this Act—
“the 2018 Act” means the Data Protection Act 2018 (see section 1); 15
“the UK GDPR” means Regulation (EU) 2016/679 of the European
Parliament and of the Council of 27 April on the protection of natural
persons with regard to the processing of personal data and on the free
movement of such data.
110 Financial provision 20
There is to be paid out of money provided by Parliament—
(a) any expenditure incurred under or by virtue of this Act by the Secretary of
State, the Treasury or a government department, and
(b)
25
any increase attributable to this Act in the sums payable under any other
Act out of money so provided.
111 Extent
(1) This Act extends to England and Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland, subject
to subsections (2) to (4).
(2) The following provisions extend to England and Wales only—
(a) sections 94 to 97 (registers of births and deaths); 30
(b) section 99 and Schedule 12 (information standards for health and adult
social care).
(3) Paragraph 23 of Schedule 12A to the 2018 Act, inserted by Schedule 13 to
this Act, extends to England and Wales and Northern Ireland only.
(4) Subject to subsection (3), an amendment, repeal or revocation made by this 35
Act has the same extent as the enactment amended, repealed or revoked.
Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill 131
Part 6—Final provisions 
112 Commencement
(1) Except as provided by subsections (2) and (3), this Act comes into force on
such day as the Secretary of State may by regulations appoint.
(2)
5
The following provisions come into force on the day on which this Act is
passed—
(a) section 60 (report on the operation of Part 2);
(b) section 75 (review of regulations under Part 3);
(c) this Part;
(d)
10
any other provision of this Act so far as it confers power to make
regulations or is otherwise necessary for enabling the exercise of such
a power on or after the day on which this Act is passed.
(3) The following provisions come into force at the end of the period of two
months beginning with the day on which this Act is passed—
(a) section 4 (consent to law enforcement processing);
(b) section 13 (representatives of controllers or processors not established 15
in the UK);
(c) section 16 (logging of law enforcement processing);
(d) section 34 (power of Commissioner to require documents);
(e) section 106 (oversight of biometrics databases).
(4) Regulations under this section may make different provision for different 20
purposes.
113 Transitional provision
(1) The Secretary of State may by regulations make transitional, transitory or
25
saving provision in connection with the coming into force of any provision
of this Act.
(2) Regulations under this section may amend Schedule 21 to the 2018 Act or
Part 2 of Schedule 7 to this Act by adding, varying or repealing provision.
(3) Regulations under this section containing provision described in subsection
(2) are subject to the negative resolution procedure.
(4) Regulations under this section may make different provision for different 30
purposes.
114 Short title
This Act may be cited as the Data Protection and Digital Information Act
2023.
132 Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill
Part 6—Final provisions 
SCHEDULES
SCHEDULE 1 Section 5
LAWFULNESS OF PROCESSING: RECOGNISED LEGITIMATE INTERESTS
In the UK GDPR, at the end insert—
“ANNEX 1 5
LAWFULNESS OF PROCESSING: RECOGNISED LEGITIMATE INTERESTS
Disclosure for purposes of processing described in Article 6(1)(e)
1. This condition is met where—
(a)
10
the processing is necessary for the purposes of making a disclosure of
personal data to another person in response to a request from the other
person, and
(b) the request states that the other person needs the personal data for the
purposes of carrying out processing described in Article 6(1)(e) that has
a legal basis that satisfies Article 6(3).
National security, public security and defence 15
2. This condition is met where the processing is necessary—
(a) for the purposes of safeguarding national security,
(b) for the purposes of protecting public security, or
(c) for defence purposes
Emergencies 20
3. This condition is met where the processing is necessary for the purposes of
responding to an emergency.
4. In paragraph 3, “emergency” has the same meaning as in Part 2 of the Civil
Contingencies Act 2004.
Crime 25
5. This condition is met where the processing is necessary for the purposes of—
(a) detecting, investigating or preventing crime, or
(b) apprehending or prosecuting offenders.
Safeguarding vulnerable individuals
6. This condition is met where the processing is necessary for the purposes of 30
safeguarding a vulnerable individual.
Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill 133
Schedule 1—Lawfulness of processing: recognised legitimate interests 
7. In paragraph 6—
“safeguarding”, in relation to a vulnerable individual, means—
(a) protecting a vulnerable individual from neglect or physical mental
or emotional harm, or
(b) protecting the physical, mental or emotional well-being of a 5
vulnerable individual;
“vulnerable individual” means an individual—
(a) aged under 18, or
(b) aged 18 or over and at risk.
8. For the purposes of paragraph 7— 10
(a) protection of an individual, or of the well-being of an individual, includes
both protection relating to a particular individual and protection relating
to a type of individual, and
(b)
15
an individual aged 18 or over is “at risk” if the controller has reasonable
cause to suspect that the individual—
(i) has needs for care and support,
(ii) is experiencing, or at risk of, neglect or physical, mental or emotional
harm, and
(iii)
20
as a result of those needs is unable to protect themselves against the
neglect, harm or risk.
Democratic engagement
9. This condition is met where-
(a) the processing is carried out for the purposes of democratic engagement,
and
(b) the data subject is aged 14 or over. 25
10. For the purposes of paragraph 9, processing is carried out for the purposes of
democratic engagement if—
(a) the processing—
(i)
30
is carried out by an elected representative or a person acting with
the authority of such a representative, and
(ii) is necessary for the purposes of discharging the elected
representative’s functions or for the purposes of the elected
representative’s democratic engagement activities,
(b) the processing—
(i) is carried out by a person or organisation included in a register 35
maintained under section 23 of the Political Parties, Elections and
Referendums Act 2000, and
134 Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill
Schedule 1—Lawfulness of processing: recognised legitimate interests 
(ii) is necessary for the purposes of the person’s or organisation’s
democratic engagement activities, for the purposes of assisting an
elected representative with their functions or democratic engagement
5
activities or for the purposes of assisting with a candidate’s campaign
for election as an elected representative,
(c) the processing—
(i) is carried out by a candidate for election as an elected representative
or a person acting with the authority of such a candidate, and
(ii) is necessary for the purposes of the candidate’s campaign for election,
(d) the processing— 10
(i) is carried out by a permitted participant in relation to a referendum
or a person acting with the authority of such a person, and
(ii) is necessary for the purposes of the permitted participant’s
campaigning in connection with the referendum, or
(e) the processing 15
(i) is carried out by an accredited campaigner in relation to a recall
petition or a person acting with the authority of such a person, and
(ii) is necessary for the purposes of the accredited campaigner’s
campaigning in connection with the recall petition.
11. In paragraph 10— 20
“accredited campaigner” has the meaning given in Part 5 of Schedule 3
to the Recall of MPs Act 2015;
“candidate”, in relation to election as an elected representative, has the
25
meaning given by the provision listed in the relevant entry in the second
column of the table in paragraph 12;
“democratic engagement activities” means activities whose purpose is to
support or promote democratic engagement;
“elected representative” means a person listed in the first column of the
table in paragraph 12 and see also paragraphs 13 and 14;
“permitted participant” has the same meaning as in Part 7 of the Political 30
Parties, Elections and Referendums Act 2000 (referendums) (see section
105 of that Act);
“recall petition” has the same meaning as in the Recall of MPs Act 2015
(see section 1(2) of that Act);
“referendum” means a referendum or other poll held on one or more 35
questions specified in, or in accordance with, an enactment.
12. This is the table referred to in paragraph 11—
Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill 135
Schedule 1—Lawfulness of processing: recognised legitimate interests 
Candidate for election as an elected
representative
Elected representative
section 118A of the Representation of
the People Act 1983
(a)
a member of the House of
Commons
article 84(2) of the National Assembly 5
for Wales (Representation of the
People) Order 2007 (S.I. 2007/236)
(b) a member of the Senedd
article 80(1) of the Scottish Parliament
10
(Elections etc) Order 2015 (S.S.I.
2015/425)
(c)
a member of the Scottish
Parliament
section 118A of the Representation of
the People Act 1983, as applied by the
(d)
a member of the Northern Ireland
Assembly
Northern Ireland Assembly (Elections)
Order 2001 (S.I. 2001/2599)
section 118A of the Representation of 15
the People Act 1983
(e)
an elected member of a local
authority within the meaning of
section 270(1) of the Local
Government Act 1972, namely—
(i)
20
in England, a county
council, a district council, a
London borough council or
a parish council;
(ii) in Wales, a county council,
25
a county borough council or
a community council;
section 118A of the Representation of
the People Act 1983, as applied by the
(f)
an elected mayor of a local
authority within the meaning of
Local Authorities (Mayoral Elections)
Part 1A or 2 of the Local
Government Act 2000
30
(England and Wales) Regulations 2007
(S.I. 2007/1024)
section 118A of the Representation of
the People Act 1983, as applied by the
(g)
a mayor for the area of a
combined authority established
Combined Authorities (Mayoral
Elections) Order 2017 (S.I. 2017/67)
under section 103 of the Local
35
Democracy, Economic
Development and Construction
Act 2009
section 118A of the Representation of
the People Act 1983
(h)
the Mayor of London or an
elected member of the London
Assembly
136 Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill
Schedule 1—Lawfulness of processing: recognised legitimate interests 
Candidate for election as an elected
representative
Elected representative
section 118A of the Representation of
the People Act 1983
(i)
an elected member of the
5
Common Council of the City of
London
section 118A of the Representation of
the People Act 1983
(j)
an elected member of the Council
of the Isles of Scilly
section 118A of the Representation of
the People Act 1983
(k)
an elected member of a council
10
constituted under section 2 of the
Local Government etc (Scotland)
Act 1994
section 130(3A) of the Electoral Law
Act (Northern Ireland) 1962 (c. 9 (N.I.))
(l)
an elected member of a district
council within the meaning of the
15
Local Government Act (Northern
Ireland) 1972 (c. 9 (N.I.))
article 3 of the Police and Crime
Commissioner Elections Order 2012
(S.I. 2012/1917)
(m) a police and crime commissioner
13.
20
For the purposes of the definition of “elected representative” in paragraph 11,
a person who is—
(a) a member of the House of Commons immediately before Parliament is
dissolved,
(b) a member of the Senedd immediately before Senedd Cymru is dissolved,
(c)
25
a member of the Scottish Parliament immediately before that Parliament
is dissolved, or
(d) a member of the Northern Ireland Assembly immediately before that
Assembly is dissolved,
is to be treated as if the person were such a member until the end of the fourth
30
day after the day on which the subsequent general election in relation to that
Parliament or Assembly is held.
14. For the purposes of the definition of “elected representative” in paragraph 11,
a person who is an elected member of the Common Council of the City of
London and whose term of office comes to an end at the end of the day
35
preceding the annual Wardmotes is to be treated as if the person were such a
member until the end of the fourth day after the day on which those Wardmotes
are held.”
Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill 137
Schedule 1—Lawfulness of processing: recognised legitimate interests 
SCHEDULE 2 Section 6
PURPOSE LIMITATION: PROCESSING TO BE TREATED AS COMPATIBLE WITH ORIGINAL
PURPOSE
In the UK GDPR, after Annex 1 (inserted by Schedule 1 to this Act) insert—
“ANNEX 2 5
PURPOSE LIMITATION: PROCESSING TO BE TREATED AS COMPATIBLE WITH
ORIGINAL PURPOSE
Disclosure for purposes of processing described in Article 6(1)(e)
1. This condition is met where—
(a) the processing— 10
(i) is necessary for the purposes of making a disclosure of personal data
to another person in response to a request from the other person,
and
(ii)
15
is not carried out by a public authority in the performance of its
tasks, and
(b) the request states that the other person needs the personal data for the
purposes of carrying out processing that—
(i) is described in Article 6(1)(e),
(ii) has a legal basis that satisfies Article 6(3), and
(iii) is necessary to safeguard an objective listed in Article 23(1)(c) to (j). 20
Public security
2. This condition is met where the processing is necessary for the purposes of
protecting public security.
Emergencies
3. This condition is met where the processing is necessary for the purposes of 25
responding to an emergency.
4. In paragraph 3, “emergency has the same meaning as in Part 2 of the Civil
Contingencies Act 2004.
Crime
5. This condition is met where the processing is necessary for the purposes of— 30
(a) detecting, investigating or preventing crime, or
138 Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill
Schedule 2—Purpose limitation: processing to be treated as compatible with original purpose 
(b) apprehending or prosecuting offenders.
Protection of vital interests of data subjects and others
6. This condition is met where the processing is necessary for the purposes of
protecting the vital interests of the data subject or another individual.
Safeguarding vulnerable individuals 5
7. This condition is met where the processing is necessary for the purposes of
safeguarding a vulnerable individual.
8. In paragraph 7—
“safeguarding”, in relation to vulnerable individual, means —
(a) protecting a vulnerable individual from neglect or physical, mental 10
or emotional harm, or
(b) protecting the physical, mental or emotional well-being of a
vulnerable individual;
“vulnerable individual” means an individual—
(a) aged under 18, or 15
(b) aged 18 or over and at risk.
9. For the purposes of paragraph 8—
(a) protection of an individual, or of the well-being of an individual, includes
20
both protection relating to a particular individual and protection relating
to a type of individual, and
(b) an individual aged 18 or over is “at risk” if the controller has reasonable
cause to suspect that the individual—
(i) has needs for care and support,
(ii)
25
is experiencing, or at risk of, neglect or physical, mental or emotional
harm, and
(iii) as a result of those needs is unable to protect themselves against the
neglect, harm or risk.
Taxation
10.
30
This condition is met where the processing is carried out for the purposes of
the assessment or collection of a tax or duty or an imposition of a similar nature.
Legal obligations
11. This condition is met where the processing is necessary for the purposes of
complying with an obligation of the controller under an enactment, a rule of
law or an order of a court or tribunal.”
Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill 139
Schedule 2—Purpose limitation: processing to be treated as compatible with original purpose 
SCHEDULE 3 Section 11
AUTOMATED DECISION-MAKING: CONSEQUENTIAL AMENDMENTS
The UK GDPR
1 The UK GDPR is amended as follows.
2 Article 12 (transparent information, communication and modalities for the 5
exercise of the rights of the data subject) is amended as follows.
(1)
(2) In paragraph 1, for “under Articles 15 to 22” substitute “made under or by
virtue of Articles 15 to 22D”.
(3) In paragraph 2, for “22”, in both places, substitute “22D”.
(4) In paragraph 3, for “under Articles 15 to 22” substitute “made under or by 10
virtue of Articles 15 to 22D”.
(5) In paragraph 5, for “under Articles 15 to 22” substitute “under or by virtue
of Articles 15 to 22D”.
3
15
In Article 12A(1) (vexatious or excessive requests) (inserted by section 7 of
this Act), for “from a data subject under any of Articles 15 to 22” substitute
“made by a data subject under or by virtue of any of Articles 15 to 22D”.
4 In Article 13(2)(f) (information about automated decision-making to be
provided where personal data is collected from the data subject), for
20
“referred to in Article 22(1) and (4)” substitute “which is subject to the
requirement to provide safeguards under Article 22C”.
5 In Article 14(2)(g) (information about automated decision-making to be
provided where personal data is not obtained from the data subject), for
“referred to in Article 22(1) and (4)” substitute “which is subject to the
requirement to provide safeguards under Article 22C”.
6 In Article 15(1)(h) (right of access by the data subject), for “referred to in 25
Article 22(1) and (4)” substitute “which is subject to the requirement to
provide safeguards under Article 22C”.
7 In the heading of Section 4 of Chapter 3, omit “and automated
decision-making”.
8 In Article 23(1) (restrictions), for “in Articles 12 to 22”, in both places, 30
substitute “in or under Articles 12 to 22D”.
9 In Article 47(2)(e) (binding corporate rules), for the words from “the right
not” to “Article 22” substitute “the right to protection in connection with
35
decisions (including profiling) based solely on automated processing in
accordance with, and with regulations made under, Articles 22A to 22D”.
10 In Article 83(5)(b) (general conditions for imposing administrative fines),
for “22” substitute “22D”.
140 Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill
Schedule 3—Automated decision-making: consequential amendments 
The 2018 Act
11 The 2018 Act is amended as follows.
12 Omit section 14 (automated decision-making authorised by law: safeguards).
13
5
In section 43(1)(d) (overview and scope of provisions in Part 3 about rights
of the data subject), for “sections 49 and 50” substitute “sections 50A to
50D”.
14 (1) Section 52 (form of provision of information etc) is amended as follows.
(2) In subsection (3), for “, 47 or 50” substitute “or 47”.
(3) In subsection (6), for “50” substitute “50D”.
15 Section 53 (manifestly unfounded or excessive requests by the data subject) 10
is amended as follows.
(1)
(2) In subsection (A1) (inserted by section 7 of this Act), “for “from a data
subject under section 45, 46, 47 or 50” substitute “made by a data subject
under or by virtue of any of sections 45, 46, 47, 50C or 50D”.
(3) In subsection (3), for “under section 45, 46, 47 or 50” substitute “described 15
in subsection (A1)”.
16 In section 149(2)(b) (enforcement notices)—
(a) after “provision of” insert “or made under”, and
(b) for “22” substitute “22D”.
17 In section 157(2)(a) (maximum amount of penalty), for “49,” substitute “50B, 20
50C,”.
SCHEDULE 4 Section 20
OBLIGATIONS OF CONTROLLERS AND PROCESSORS: CONSEQUENTIAL AMENDMENTS
The UK GDPR
1 The UK GDPR is amended as follows. 25
2 In Article 4(1) (definitions), after point (11) insert—
“(11A) “senior responsible individual” means an individual designated as
the senior responsible individual of a controller or processor under
Article 27A;”.
3 In Article 13(1)(b) (information to be provided where personal data is 30
collected from the data subject), for “data protection officer” substitute
“senior responsible individual”.
4 In Article 14(1)(b) (information to be provided where personal data has
35
not been obtained from the data subject), for “data protection officer”
substitute “senior responsible individual”.
Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill 141
Schedule 4—Obligations of controllers and processors: consequential amendments 
5 In the heading of Section 1 of Chapter 4 (general obligations), at the end
insert “of the controller”.
6 In Article 33(3)(b) (notification of a personal data breach to the
5
Commissioner), for “data protection officer” substitute “senior responsible
individual”.
7 In Article 47(2)(h) (binding corporate rules), for “data protection officer
designated in accordance with Article 37” substitute “senior responsible
individual”.
8
10
In Article 49(6) (derogations for specific authorities: documenting
assessment), for “30” substitute “30A”.
9 In Article 57(3) (performance of Information Commissioner’s tasks generally
to be free of charge for data subject), for “data protection officer” substitute
“senior responsible individual”.
10
15
Article 83 (general conditions for imposing an administrative fine) is
amended as follows.
(1)
(2) In paragraph 2(c), at the end insert “, including any consultation under
Article 36(1)”.
(3) In paragraph 2(d), omit “technical and organisational”.
(4) In paragraph 4(a), for “39” substitute “36”.
The 2018 Act 20
11 The 2018 Act is amended as follows.
12 In section 33 (other definitions for Part 3), after subsection (6) insert—
“(6A) “Senior responsible individual” means an individual designated as
25
the senior responsible individual of a controller or processor under
section 58A.”
13 In section 44(1)(b) (controller’s duty to provide information), for “data
protection officer (see sections 69 to 71)” substitute “senior responsible
individual”.
14
30
In section 55(1) (overview of provisions in Part 3 about controllers and
processors)—
(a) in paragraph (a), for “and processors (see sections 56 to 65)”
substitute “(see sections 56 to 58)”,
(b) after that paragraph insert—
“(aa)
35
makes provision for the designation, tasks and
position of senior responsible individuals (see sections
58A to 58C);
(ab) makes provision about processors (see section 59)
and processing under the authority of the controller
or processor (see section 60);
142 Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill
Schedule 4—Obligations of controllers and processors: consequential amendments 
(ac) makes provision about records (see sections 61A and
62) and co-operation with the Commissioner (see
section 63);
(ad)
5
makes provision about risk assessment (see section
64) and prior consultation with the Commissioner
(see section 65);”, and
(c) omit paragraph (d).
15 In section 67(4)(b) (notification of a personal data breach to the
10
Commissioner), for “data protection officer” substitute “senior responsible
individual”.
16 In section 68(2)(b) (communication of a personal data breach to the data
subject), for “data protection officer” substitute “senior responsible
individual”.
17
15
Section 134 (Commissioner’s power to charge fees for services) is amended
as follows.
(1)
(2) The existing text becomes subsection (1).
(3) In that subsection, for “data protection officer” substitute “senior responsible
individual”.
(4) After that subsection insert—
“(2) In this section and section 135, “senior responsible individual” means 20
an individual designated as the senior responsible individual of a
controller or processor under Article 27A of the UK GDPR or section
58A of this Act.”
18
25
In section 135(1) (manifestly unfounded or excessive requests by data subject
etc), for “data protection officer” substitute “senior responsible individual”.
19 In section 149(2)(c) (enforcement notices)—
(a) for “39” substitute “35”, and
(b) omit “or 65”.
20 In section 155(3) (penalty notices)—
(a) in paragraph (c), at the end insert “, including any consultation 30
under section 65”, and
(b) in paragraph (d), omit “technical and organisational”.
21 In section 206 (index of defined expressions), in the Table, at the appropriate
place insert—
“senior responsible individual (in Part 3) section 33”. 35
22 In paragraph 41 of Schedule 1 (additional safeguards for processing of
special categories of personal data etc: record of processing), for “30”
substitute “30A”.
Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill 143
Schedule 4—Obligations of controllers and processors: consequential amendments 
23 In paragraph 26(9)(c) of Schedule 2 (exemptions etc from the UK GDPR:
journalistic, academic, artistic and literary purposes), omit sub-paragraph
(ii).
SCHEDULE 5 Section 21
TRANSFERS OF PERSONAL DATA TO THIRD COUNTRIES ETC: GENERAL PROCESSING 5
Introduction
1 Chapter 5 of the UK GDPR (transfers of personal data to third countries
or international organisations) is amended as follows.
General principles for transfers
2 Omit Article 44 (transfers of personal data to third countries etc: general 10
principles for transfers).
(1)
(2) After that Article insert—
“Article 44A
General principles for transfers
1. A controller or processor may transfer personal data to a third 15
country or an international organisation only if—
(a) the condition in paragraph 2 is met, and
(b) the transfer is carried out in compliance with the other
provisions of this Regulation.
2. The condition is met if the transfer— 20
(a) is approved by regulations under Article 45A that are in force
at the time of the transfer,
(b) is made subject to appropriate safeguards (see Article 46), or
(c)
25
is made in reliance on a derogation for specific situations (see
Article 49).
3. A transfer may not be made in reliance on paragraph 2(b) or (c) if,
or to the extent that, it would breach a restriction in regulations
under Article 49A.”
Transfers approved by regulations
3 Omit Article 45 (transfers on the basis of an adequacy decision). 30
144 Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill
Schedule 5—Transfers of personal data to third countries etc: general processing 
4 After that Article insert—
“Article 45A
Transfers approved by regulations
1.
5
For the purposes of Article 44A, the Secretary of State may by
regulations approve transfers of personal data to—
(a) a third country, or
(b) an international organisation.
2. The Secretary of State may only make regulations under this Article
10
approving transfers to a third country or international organisation
if the Secretary of State considers that the data protection test is
met in relation to the transfers (see Article 45B).
3. In making regulations under this Article, the Secretary of State
may have regard to any matter which the Secretary of State
15
considers relevant, including the desirability of facilitating transfers
of personal data to and from the United Kingdom.
4. Regulations under this Article may, among other things—
(a) make provision in relation to a third country or international
organisation specified in the regulations or a description of
country or organisation;
(b) approve all transfers of personal data to a third country or 20
international organisation or only transfers specified or
described in the regulations;
(c) identify a transfer of personal data by any means, including
by reference to—
(i) a sector or geographic area within a third country, 25
(ii) the controller or processor,
(iii) the recipient of the personal data
(iv) the personal data transferred
(v) the means by which the transfer is made, or
(vi) relevant legislation, schemes, lists or other arrangements 30
or documents, as they have effect from time to time;
(d) confer a discretion on a person.
5. Regulations under this Article are subject to the negative resolution
procedure.
Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill 145
Schedule 5—Transfers of personal data to third countries etc: general processing 
Article 45B
The data protection test
1. For the purposes of Article 45A, the data protection test is met in
5
relation to transfers of personal data to a third country or
international organisation if the standard of the protection provided
for data subjects with regard to general processing of personal
data in the country or by the organisation is not materially lower
than the standard of the protection provided for data subjects by
or under—
(a) this Regulation, 10
(b) Part 2 of the 2018 Act, and
(c) Parts 5 to 7 of that Act, so far as relevant to general
processing.
2.
15
In considering whether the data protection test is met in relation
to transfers of personal data to a third country or international
organisation, the Secretary of State must consider, among other
things—
(a) respect for the rule of law and for human rights in the
country or by the organisation,
(b) the existence, and powers, of an authority responsible for 20
enforcing the protection of data subjects with regard to the
processing of personal data in the country or by the
organisation,
(c)
25
arrangements for judicial or non-judicial redress for data
subjects in connection with such processing,
(d) rules about the transfer of personal data from the country
or by the organisation to other countries or international
organisations,
(e)
30
relevant international obligations of the country or
organisation, and
(f) the constitution, traditions and culture of the country or
organisation.
3. In paragraphs 1 and 2—
(a)
35
the references to the protection provided for data subjects
are to that protection taken as a whole,
(b) the references to general processing are to processing to
which this Regulation applies or equivalent types of
processing in the third country or by the international
organisation (as appropriate), and
146 Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill
Schedule 5—Transfers of personal data to third countries etc: general processing 
(c) the references to processing of personal data in the third
country or by the international organisation are references
only to the processing of personal data transferred from the
United Kingdom.
4. When the data protection test is applied only to certain transfers 5
to a third country or international organisation that are specified
or described, or to be specified or described, in regulations (in
accordance with Article 45A(4)(b))—
(a)
10
the references in paragraphs 1 to 3 to personal data are to
be read as references only to personal data likely to be the
subject of such transfers, and
(b) the reference in paragraph 2(d) to the transfer of personal
data to other countries or international organisations is to be
15
read as including the transfer of personal data within the
third country or international organisation.”
Transfers approved by regulations: monitoring
5 After Article 45B (inserted by paragraph 4) insert—
“Article 45C
Transfers approved by regulations: monitoring
1. The Secretary of State must, on an ongoing basis, monitor 20
developments in third countries and international organisations
that could affect decisions to make regulations under Article 45A
or to amend or revoke such regulations.
2.
25
Where the Secretary of State becomes aware that the data protection
test is no longer met in relation to transfers approved, or of a
description approved, in regulations under Article 45A, the
Secretary of State must, to the extent necessary, amend or revoke
the regulations.
3.
30
Where regulations under Article 45A are amended or revoked in
accordance with paragraph 2, the Secretary of State must enter
into consultations with the third country or international
organisation concerned with a view to improving the protection
provided to data subjects with regard to the processing of personal
data in the country or by the organisation.
4. The Secretary of State must publish— 35
(a) a list of the third countries and international organisations,
and the descriptions of such countries and organisations,
which are for the time being approved by regulations under
40
Article 45A as places or persons to which personal data may
be transferred, and
Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill 147
Schedule 5—Transfers of personal data to third countries etc: general processing 
(b) a list of the third countries and international organisations,
and the descriptions of such countries and organisations,
which have been but are no longer approved by such
regulations.
5. In the case of regulations under Article 45A which approve only 5
certain transfers to a third country or international organisation
specified or described in the regulations (in accordance with Article
45A(4)(b)), the lists published under paragraph 4 must specify or
describe the relevant transfers.”
Transfers subject to appropriate safeguards 10
6 Article 46 (transfers subject to appropriate safeguards) is amended as
follows.
(1)
(2) Omit paragraph 1.
(3) After that paragraph insert—
“1A. A transfer of personal data to a third country or an international 15
organisation by a controller or processor is made subject to
appropriate safeguards only—
(a) in a case in which—
(i)
20
safeguards are provided in connection with the transfer
as described in paragraph 2 or 3 or regulations made
under Article 47A(4), and
(ii) the controller or processor, acting reasonably and
proportionately, considers that the data protection test
25
is met in relation to the transfer or that type of transfer
(see paragraph 6), or
(b) in a case in which—
(i) safeguards are provided in accordance with paragraph
2(a) by an instrument that is intended to be relied on in
connection with the transfer or that type of transfer, and
(ii) each public body that is a party to the instrument, acting 30
reasonably and proportionately, considers that the data
protection test is met in relation to the transfers, or types
of transfer, intended to be made in reliance on the
instrument (see paragraph 6).”
(4) In paragraph 2— 35
(a) in the words before point (a)—
(i) omit “appropriate”, and
(ii) for “paragraph 1” substitute “paragraph 1A(a)”,
148 Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill
Schedule 5—Transfers of personal data to third countries etc: general processing 
(b) in point (a), for “public authorities or bodies” substitute “a public
body and another relevant person or persons”,
(c) in point (b), after “rules” insert “approved”,
(d)
5
in point (c), for “section 17C of the 2018 Act” substitute “Article
47A(1)”,
(e) in point (e), for “appropriate safeguards” substitute “safeguards
provided by the code”, and
(f) in point (f), for “appropriate safeguards” substitute “safeguards
provided by the mechanism”.
(5) In paragraph 3, in the words before point (a)— 10
(a) omit “appropriate”,
(b) for “paragraph 1” substitute “paragraph 1A(a)”,
(c) omit “, in particular,”, and
(d)
15
in point (b), for “public authorities or bodies” substitute “a public
body and another relevant person or persons”.
(6) At the end insert—
“6. For the purposes of this Article, the data protection test is met in
relation to a transfer, or a type of transfer, of personal data if, after
20
the transfer, the standard of the protection provided for the data
subject with regard to that personal data by the safeguards required
under paragraph 1A, and (where relevant) by other means, would
not be materially lower than the standard of the protection provided
for the data subject with regard to the personal data by or under—
(a) this Regulation,
(b) Part 2 of the 2018 Act, and 25
(c) Parts 5 to 7 of that Act, so far as relevant to processing to
which this Regulation applies.
7. For the purposes of paragraph 1A(a)(ii) and (b)(ii), what is
30
reasonable and proportionate is to be determined by reference to
all the circumstances, or likely circumstances, of the transfer or type
of transfer, including the nature and volume of the personal data
transferred.
8. In this Article—
(a)
35
references to the protection provided for the data subject are
to that protection taken as a whole;
(b) “relevant person” means a public body or another person
exercising functions of a public nature.”
7 In the heading of Article 47 (binding corporate rules) at the beginning insert
“Transfers subject to appropriate safeguards:”.
Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill 149
Schedule 5—Transfers of personal data to third countries etc: general processing 
8 After Article 47 insert—
“Article 47A
Transfers subject to appropriate safeguards: further provision
1.
5
The Secretary of State may by regulations specify standard data
protection clauses which the Secretary of State considers are capable
of securing that the data protection test set out in Article 46 is met
in relation to transfers of personal data generally or in relation to
a type of transfer specified in the regulations.
2.
10
The Secretary of State must keep under review the standard data
protection clauses specified in regulations under paragraph 1 that
are for the time being in force.
3. Regulations under paragraph 1 are subject to the negative
resolution procedure.
4.
15
The Secretary of State may by regulations make provision about
further safeguards that may be relied on for the purposes of Article
46(1A)(a).
5. The Secretary of State may only make regulations under paragraph
4 if the Secretary of State considers that the further safeguards are
20
capable of securing that the data protection test set out in Article
46 is met in relation to transfers of personal data generally or in
relation to a type of transfer specified in the regulations.
6. Regulations under paragraph 4 may, among other things—
(a) make provision by adopting safeguards prepared or
published by another person;
(b) make provision about ways of providing safeguards which 25
require authorisation from the Commissioner;
(c) amend Article 46 by—
(i) adding ways of providing safeguards, or
(ii)
30
varying or omitting ways of providing safeguards
which were added by regulations under this Article.
7. Regulations under paragraph 4 are subject to the affirmative
resolution procedure.”
Derogations for specific situations
9 (1) Article 49 (derogations for specific situations) is amended as follows.
(2) In paragraph 1, in the first subparagraph— 35
(a) for “adequacy regulations under section 17A of the 2018 Act, or of
appropriate safeguards pursuant to Article 46, including binding
corporate rules” substitute “approval by regulations under Article
150 Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill
Schedule 5—Transfers of personal data to third countries etc: general processing 
45A and of compliance with Article 46 (appropriate safeguards)”,
and
(b) in point (a), for “an adequacy decision” substitute “approval by
regulations under Article 45A”.
(3) In paragraph 1, in the second subparagraph, for “a provision in Article 45” 5
substitute “Article 45A”.
(4) In paragraph 4, for “section 18(1) of the 2018 Act” substitute “paragraph
4A”.
(5) After paragraph 4 insert—
“4A The Secretary of State may by regulations specify for the purposes 10
of point (d) of paragraph 1—
(a) circumstances in which a transfer of personal data to a
third country or international organisation is to be taken
15
to be necessary for important reasons of public interest,
and
(b) circumstances in which a transfer of personal data to a
third country or international organisation which is not
required by an enactment is not to be taken to be
necessary for important reasons of public interest.”
(6) Omit paragraph 5A. 20
(7) After paragraph 6 insert—
“7. Regulations under this Article—
(a) are subject to the made affirmative resolution procedure where
25
the Secretary of State has made an urgency statement in respect
of them;
(b) otherwise, are subject to the affirmative resolution procedure.
8. For the purposes of this Article, an urgency statement is a reasoned
statement that the Secretary of State considers it desirable for the
regulations to come into force without delay.”
Public interest restrictions 30
10 After Article 49 insert—
“Article 49A
Restriction in the public interest
1.
35
The Secretary of State may by regulations restrict the transfer of
a category of personal data to a third country or international
organisation where—
(a) the transfer is not approved by regulations under Article 45A
for the time being in force, and
Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill 151
Schedule 5—Transfers of personal data to third countries etc: general processing 
(b) the Secretary of State considers the restriction to be necessary
for important reasons of public interest.
2. Regulations under this Article—
(a)
5
are subject to the made affirmative resolution procedure
where the Secretary of State has made an urgency statement
in respect of them;
(b) otherwise, are subject to the affirmative resolution procedure.
3. For the purposes of this Article, an urgency statement is a reasoned
10
statement that the Secretary of State considers it desirable for the
regulations to come into force without delay.”
SCHEDULE 6 Section 21
TRANSFERS OF PERSONAL DATA TO THIRD COUNTRIES ETC: LAW ENFORCEMENT
PROCESSING
Introduction
1 Chapter 5 of Part 3 of the 2018 Act (transfers of personal data to third 15
countries etc) is amended as follows.
Overview and interpretation
2 In section 72 (overview and interpretation), for subsection (2) substitute—
“(2) In this Chapter—
“relevant authority”, in relation to a third country, means any 20
person based in a third country that has (in that country)
functions comparable to those of a competent authority;
“relevant international organisation” means an international
25
organisation that carries out functions for any of the law
enforcement purposes;
“relevant restricted transfer case” means (subject to subsection
(3)) a case in which the personal data was originally made
available to a competent authority (whether the current
controller or a previous controller)—
(a) by a relevant authority in a third country or by a 30
relevant international organisation, and
(b) subject to a condition (however imposed) that the
data is not to be transferred to a third country or
35
international organisation without authorisation from
that authority or organisation or another such
authority or organisation;
152 Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill
Schedule 6—Transfers of personal data to third countries etc: law enforcement processing 
“overseas authoriser”, in connection with a relevant restricted
transfer case, means the person whose authorisation is
required.
(3)
5
In a case in which the personal data was originally made available
to a competent authority subject to a condition that only requires
authorisation for further transfers in certain circumstances, the case
is a relevant restricted transfer case only in those circumstances.”
General principles for transfer
3 (1) Section 73 (general principles for transfers) is amended as follows.
(2) In subsection (1)— 10
(a) for “may not” substitute “may”,
(b) for “unless” substitute “for a law enforcement purpose only if”,
(c) omit paragraph (b) (and the “and” before it), and
(d) after that paragraph insert—
“(c) the transfer is carried out in accordance with the other 15
provisions of this Part, and
(d) in a relevant restricted transfer case, the overseas
authoriser has authorised the transfer or subsection
(5) applies.”
(3) For subsection (3) substitute— 20
“(3) Condition 2 is that the transfer—
(a) is approved by regulations under section 74AA that are in
force at the time of the transfer,
(b)
25
is made subject to appropriate safeguards (see section 75),
or
(c) is based on special circumstances (see section 76).”
(4) In subsection (5)—
(a) for the words before paragraph (a) substitute “This subsection
applies if—”,
(b) in paragraph (a), for the words from “either” to “State” substitute 30
“to the public security, national security or essential interests of a
third country or the United Kingdom”, and
(c) in paragraph (b), for “the authorisation” substitute “authorisation
from the overseas authoriser”.
(5) In subsection (6)— 35
(a) for “without the authorisation” substitute “in a relevant restricted
transfer case without the authorisation from the overseas authoriser”,
and
(b)
40
for the words from “(1)(b)” to “the transfer” substitute “(1)(d), the
overseas authoriser”.
Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill 153
Schedule 6—Transfers of personal data to third countries etc: law enforcement processing 
(6) Omit subsection (7).
Transfers approved by regulations
4 (1) Omit section 74A (transfers based on adequacy regulations).
(2) After that section insert—
“74AA Transfers approved by regulations 5
(1) For the purposes of section 73, the Secretary of State may by
regulations approve transfers of personal data to—
(a) a third country, or
(b) an international organisation.
(2) The Secretary of State may only make regulations under this section 10
approving transfers to a third country or international organisation
if the Secretary of State considers that the data protection test is
met in relation to the transfers (see section 74AB).
(3)
15
In making regulations under this section, the Secretary of State may
have regard to any matter which the Secretary of State considers
relevant, including the desirability of facilitating transfers of personal
data to and from the United Kingdom.
(4) Regulations under this section may, among other things—
(a)
20
make provision by reference to a third country or
international organisation specified in the regulations or a
description of country or organisation;
(b) approve all transfers of personal data to a third country or
international organisation or only transfers specified or
described in the regulations;
(c) identify a transfer of personal data by any means, including 25
by reference to—
(i) a sector or geographic area within a third country,
(ii) the controller or processor,
(iii) the recipient of the personal data,
(iv) the personal data transferred, 30
(v) the means by which the transfer is made, or
(vi) relevant legislation, schemes, lists or other
arrangements or documents, as they have effect from
time to time;
(d) confer a discretion on a person. 35
(5) Regulations under this section are subject to the negative resolution
procedure.
154 Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill
Schedule 6—Transfers of personal data to third countries etc: law enforcement processing 
74AB The data protection test
(1) For the purposes of section 74AA, the data protection test is met in
relation to transfers to a third country or international organisation
5
if the standard of the protection provided for data subjects with
regard to law enforcement processing of personal data in the country
or by the organisation is not materially lower than the standard of
the protection provided for data subjects by or under—
(a) this Part, and
(b) Parts 5 to 7, so far as relevant to law enforcement processing.
(2) In considering whether the data protection test is met in relation to 10
transfers of personal data to a third country or international
organisation, the Secretary of State must consider, among other
things—
(a)
15
respect for the rule of law and for human rights in the
country or by the organisation,
(b) the existence, and powers, of an authority responsible for
enforcing the protection of data subjects with regard to the
processing of personal data in the country or by the
organisation,
(c) arrangements for judicial or non-judicial redress for data 20
subjects in connection with such processing,
(d) rules about the transfer of personal data from the country
or by the organisation to other countries or international
organisations,
(e) relevant international obligations of the country or 25
organisation, and
(f) the constitution, traditions and culture of the country or
organisation.
(3) In subsections (1) and (2)—
(a) the references to the protection provided for data subjects 30
are to that protection taken as a whole,
(b) the references to law enforcement processing are to
processing by a competent authority for any of the law
35
enforcement purposes or equivalent types of processing in
the third country or by the international organisation (as
appropriate), and
(c) the references to processing of personal data in the third
country or by the international organisation are references
40
only to the processing of personal data transferred from the
United Kingdom.
(4) When the data protection test is applied only to certain transfers to
a third country or international organisation that are specified or
Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill 155
Schedule 6—Transfers of personal data to third countries etc: law enforcement processing 
described, or to be specified or described, in regulations (in
accordance with section 74AA(4)(b))—
(a) the references in subsections (1) to (3) to personal data are
5
to be read as references only to personal data likely to be
the subject of such transfers, and
(b) the reference in subsection (2)(d) to the transfer of personal
data to other countries or international organisations is to
be read as including the transfer of personal data within the
third country or international organisation.”
Transfers approved by regulations: monitoring 10
5 Section 74B (transfers based on adequacy regulations: review etc) is
amended as follows.
(1)
(2) For the heading substitute “Transfers approved by regulations: monitoring”.
(3) Omit subsections (1) and (2).
(4) In subsection (3), for “under section 74A” substitute “giving approval under 15
section 74AA”.
(5) In subsection (4), for the words from the beginning to “otherwise,” substitute
“Where the Secretary of State becomes aware that the data protection test
20
is no longer met in relation to transfers to approved, or of a description
approved, in regulations under section 74AA,”.
(6) In subsection (5)—
(a) for “section 74A” substitute “section 74AA”, and
(b) for “remedying the lack of an adequate level of protection” substitute
25
“improving the protection provided to data subjects with regard to
the processing of personal data in the country or by the
organisation”.
(7) In subsection (6)(a)—
(a) omit “, territories and specified sectors within a third country”,
(b) omit “, territories, sectors”, and
(c) for “specified in regulations under section 74A” substitute “approved 30
by regulations under section 74AA as places or persons to which
personal data may be transferred”.
(8) In subsection (6)(b)—
(a) omit “, territories and specified sectors within a third country”,
(b) omit “, territories, sectors”, and 35
(c) for “specified in” substitute “approved by”.
(9) In subsection (7)—
(a) for “regulations under section 74A which specify that an adequate
40
level of protection of personal data is ensured only for a transfer”
substitute “regulations under section 74AA which approve only
156 Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill
Schedule 6—Transfers of personal data to third countries etc: law enforcement processing 
certain transfers to a third country or international organisation that
are”,
(b) after “the regulations” insert “(in accordance with section
74AA(4)(b))”, and
(c) omit paragraph (a) (together with the final “and”). 5
Transfers subject to appropriate safeguards
6 Section 75 (transfers on the basis of appropriate safeguards) is amended
as follows.
(1)
(2) In the heading, for “on the basis of” substitute “subject to”.
(3) Omit subsection (1). 10
(4) After that subsection insert—
“(1A) A transfer of personal data to a third country or an international
organisation is made subject to appropriate safeguards only if—
(a)
15
the controller, acting reasonably and proportionately,
considers that the data protection test is met in relation to
the transfer or that type of transfer (see subsection (5)), or
(b) an appropriate legal instrument binds the intended recipient
of the data (see subsection (4)).”
(5) In subsection (2), for “subsection (1)(b)” substitute “this section”.
(6) In subsection (3), for “subsection (1)” substitute “this section”. 20
(7) At the end insert—
“(4) For the purposes of this section, a legal instrument is “appropriate”,
in relation to a transfer of personal data, if—
(a)
25
the instrument is intended to be relied on in connection with
the transfer or that type of transfer,
(b) at least one competent authority is a party to the instrument,
and
(c) each competent authority that is a party to the instrument,
30
acting reasonably and proportionately, considers that the
data protection test is met in relation to the transfers, or
types of transfer, intended to be made in reliance on the
instrument (see subsection (5)).
(5) For the purposes of this section, the data protection test is met in
35
relation to a transfer, or a type of transfer, of personal data if, after
the transfer, the standard of the protection provided for the data
subject with regard to that personal data, whether by a binding
legal instrument or by other means, would not be materially lower
than the standard of the protection provided for the data subject
with regard to the personal data by or under—
(a) this Part, and 40
Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill 157
Schedule 6—Transfers of personal data to third countries etc: law enforcement processing 
(b) Parts 5 to 7, so far as they relate to processing by a
competent authority for any of the law enforcement purposes.
(6) For the purposes of subsections (1A)(a) and (4)(c), what is reasonable
5
and proportionate is to be determined by reference to all the
circumstances, or likely circumstances, of the transfer or type of
transfer, including the nature and volume of the personal data
transferred.
(7) In this section, references to the protection provided for the data
subject are to that protection taken as a whole.”
Transfers based on special circumstances 10
7 Section 76 (transfers on the basis of special circumstances) is amended as
follows.
(1)
(2) In the heading, for “on the basis of” substitute “based on”.
(3) Before subsection (1) insert—
“(A1) A transfer of personal data to a third country or international 15
organisation is based on special circumstances where—
(a) it is made in the absence of approval by regulations under
section 74AA and of compliance with section 75 (appropriate
safeguards), and
(b) it is necessary for a special purpose.” 20
(4) In subsection (1)—
(a) for the words before paragraph (a) substitute “A transfer of personal
data is necessary for a special purpose if it is necessary—”,
(b) in paragraph (c)—
(i) after “public security” insert “or national security”, and 25
(ii) at the end insert “or the United Kingdom”,
(c) in paragraph (d), for “in individual cases” substitute “in particular
circumstances,”, and
(d)
30
in paragraph (e), for “in individual cases” substitute “in particular
circumstances,”.
(5) In subsection (2), for “But subsection (1)(d) and (e) do not apply” substitute
“But a transfer of personal data is not necessary for a special purpose by
virtue of subsection (1)(d) or (e)”.
(6) After subsection (2) insert—
“(2A) In accordance with the third data protection principle, the amount 35
of personal data transferred in reliance on this section must not be
excessive in relation to the special purpose relied on.”
(7) In subsection (3), for “subsection (1)” substitute “this section”.
158 Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill
Schedule 6—Transfers of personal data to third countries etc: law enforcement processing 
Subsequent transfers
8 (1) Section 78 (subsequent transfers) is amended as follows.
(2) In subsection (1)—
(a) after “transfer” insert “—
(a)”, and 5
(b) at the end insert “(the “UK authoriser”), or
(b) (subject to subsection (4)) that—
(i) the data is not to be so transferred without
10
such authorisation except where subsection
(1A) applies, and
(ii) where a transfer is made without such
authorisation, the UK authoriser must be
informed without delay.”
(3) After subsection (1) insert—
“(1A) This subsection applies if— 15
(a) the transfer is necessary for the prevention of an immediate
and serious threat to the public security or national security
of a third country or the United Kingdom, and
(b)
20
authorisation from the UK authoriser cannot be obtained in
good time.”
(4) In subsection (2), for “A competent authority” substitute “The UK
authoriser”.
(5) In subsection (3), for “competent authority” substitute “UK authoriser”.
(6) For subsection (4) substitute—
“(4) In a relevant restricted transfer case— 25
(a) the transferring controller must make the transfer subject to
the condition described in subsection (1)(a), and
(b) the UK authoriser may not authorise a further transfer of
30
personal data under subsection (1)(a) unless the overseas
authoriser has authorised the further transfer or subsection
(5) applies.”
(7) In subsection (5)—
(a) for the words before paragraph (a) substitute “This subsection
applies if—”,
(b) in paragraph (a), for the words from “either” to “State” substitute 35
“to the public security, national security or essential interests of a
third country or the United Kingdom”, and
(c) in paragraph (b), for “the authorisation” substitute “authorisation
from the overseas authoriser”.
(8) In subsection (6)— 40
Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill 159
Schedule 6—Transfers of personal data to third countries etc: law enforcement processing 
(a) for “without the authorisation” substitute “in a relevant restricted
transfer case without the authorisation from the overseas authoriser”,
and
(b)
5
for the words from “(4)” to “the transfer” substitute “(4)(b), the
overseas authoriser”.
SCHEDULE 7 Section 21
TRANSFERS OF PERSONAL DATA TO THIRD COUNTRIES ETC: CONSEQUENTIAL AND
TRANSITIONAL PROVISION
PART 1
CONSEQUENTIAL PROVISION 10
The UK GDPR
1 The UK GDPR is amended as follows.
2 In Article 13(1)(f) (information to be provided where personal data is
collected from the data subject)—
(a) for “adequacy regulations under section 17A of the 2018 Act” 15
substitute “regulations under Article 45A”, and
(b) for “reference to the appropriate or suitable safeguards” substitute
“the safeguards relied on”.
3
20
In Article 14(1)(f) (information to be provided where personal data is not
obtained from the data subject)—
(a) for “adequacy regulations under section 17A of the 2018 Act”
substitute “regulations under Article 45A”, and
(b) for “reference to the appropriate or suitable safeguards” substitute
“the safeguards relied on”.
4 In Article 15(2) (right of access by the data subject)— 25
(a) after “organisation” insert “in reliance on Article 46”, and
(b) for “appropriate safeguards pursuant to Article 46 relating to”
substitute “safeguards provided in accordance with Article
46(1A)(a)(i) or (b)(i) for the purposes of”.
5 (1) Article 40 (codes of conduct) is amended as follows. 30
(2) In paragraph 3 omit “appropriate” in both places.
(3) In paragraph 5, for “provides sufficient appropriate safeguards” substitute
“is capable of providing safeguards for the purposes of Article 46”.
6 In Article 42(2) (certification) omit “appropriate” in both places.
7 In Article 57(1) (Information Commissioner’s tasks)— 35
(a) in point (m) omit “which provide sufficient safeguards,”, and
160 Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill
Schedule 7—Transfers of personal data to third countries etc: consequential and transitional provision
Part 1—Consequential provision 
(b) after point (s) insert—
“(sa) provide authorisation required under regulations
made under Article 47A;”.
8
5
In Article 58(3) (authorisation and advisory powers of the Commissioner),
after point (j) insert—
“(k) to provide authorisation required under regulations made
under Article 47A”.
9 In Article 83(5)(c) (general conditions for imposing administrative fines),
for “44” substitute “44A”.
The 2018 Act 10
10 The 2018 Act is amended as follows.
11 Omit section 17A (transfers based on adequacy decisions) and the italic
heading before it.
12 Omit section 17B (transfers based on adequacy regulations: review etc).
13 Omit section 17C (standard data protection clauses). 15
14 Omit section 18 (transfers of personal data to third countries etc: public
interest).
15 In section 24(2) (manual unstructured data held by FOI public authorities)—
(a) in paragraph (c), for “44 to 49” substitute “44A to 49A”, and
(b) omit paragraph (ca). 20
16 In section 26(2) (national security and defence exemption), omit paragraph
(fa).
17 In section 119A(1) (power of Information Commissioner to specify standard
25
clauses for transfers to third countries etc providing appropriate safeguards),
omit from “provide” to the end and insert “are capable of securing that the
data protection test set out in Article 46 of the UK GDPR is met in relation
to transfers of personal data generally or in relation to types of transfer
described in the document”.
18
30
In section 149(2)(e) (enforcement notices), for “44 to 49” substitute “44A to
49A”.
19 (1) Section 182 (regulations and consultation) is amended as follows.
(2) Omit subsection (4).
(3) In subsection (6), for “Where regulations under this Act” substitute “For
the purposes of this Act, where regulations”.
(4) In subsection (7), for “Where regulations under this Act” substitute “For 35
the purposes of this Act, where regulations”.
(5) In subsection (8)—
Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill 161
Schedule 7—Transfers of personal data to third countries etc: consequential and transitional provision
Part 1—Consequential provision 
(a) for “Where regulations under this Act” substitute “For the purposes
of this Act, regulations”,
(b) after “procedure”” insert “if”,
(c) in paragraph (a), for “the urgency” substitute “an urgency”, and
(d) in paragraph (b), for “the period of 120 days” substitute “a period”. 5
(6) Omit subsections (9) and (10).
(7) In subsection (11), after “by regulations” insert “made under this Act or
another enactment that are”.
(8) For subsection (14) substitute—
“(14) For the purposes of this section, an urgency statement is a reasoned 10
statement that the Secretary of State considers it desirable for
regulations to come into force without delay.”
20 In section 205(2)(e) (references to periods of time) omit “and (9)”.
21
15
In paragraph 26(9)(d) of Schedule 2 (exemptions etc for journalistic,
academic, artistic and literary purposes), for “44” substitute “44A”.
22 Part 3 of Schedule 21 (further transitional provision etc: transfers to third
countries and international organisations) is amended as follows.
(1)
(2) In the heading before paragraph 4, for “adequacy decisions and adequacy
regulations” substitute “transfers approved by regulations”.
(3) In paragraph 4 (UK GDPR: adequacy decisions and adequacy regulations)— 20
(a) in sub-paragraph (1), for “based on adequacy regulations” substitute
“to be treated as approved by regulations made under Article 45A
of the UK GDPR”,
(b)
25
in sub-paragraph (4)(a), for “lists or other” substitute “schemes, lists
or other arrangements or”, and
(c) omit sub-paragraph (6).
(4) In paragraph 6 (UK GDPR: application of certain provisions referring to
regulations made under section 17A of the 2018 Act)—
(a)
30
in sub-paragraph (1)(a), for “section 17A” substitute “Article 45A of
the UK GDPR”,
(b) for sub-paragraph (2) substitute—
“(2) Those provisions are Articles 13(1)(f), 14(1)(f), 45C, 49(1) and
49A(1) of the UK GDPR.”, and
(c) after that sub-paragraph insert—
“(3) In its application to transfers treated as approved by virtue 35
of paragraph 1, Article 45C(5) of the UK GDPR (transfers
approved by regulations: monitoring) has effect as if the
reference to Article 45A(4)(b) were omitted.”
(5)
40
Omit paragraphs 7 and 8 (UK GDPR: transfers subject to appropriate
safeguards provided by standard data protection clauses).
162 Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill
Schedule 7—Transfers of personal data to third countries etc: consequential and transitional provision
Part 1—Consequential provision 
(6) In paragraph 9 (UK GDPR: transfers subject to appropriate safeguards
provided by binding corporate rules)—
(a) in sub-paragraph (1)—
(i)
5
for “The appropriate safeguards referred to in Article 46(1)
of the UK GDPR may be provided for” substitute “The
requirement for safeguards to be provided under Article
46(1A)(a)(i) of the UK GDPR may be satisfied”, and
(ii) after “described” insert “in”,
(b) in sub-paragraph (3)(a)—
(i) for “or provision” substitute “, of provision”, and 10
(ii) for “(or both)” substitute “or of the amendment of Chapter
5 of the UK GDPR by the Data Protection and Digital
Information Act 2023”, and
(c) in sub-paragraph (4), after paragraph (a) insert—
“(aa) changing references to provision made by regulations 15
under section 17A into references to provision made
by regulations made under Article 45A of the UK
GDPR;”.
(7)
20
In the heading before paragraph 10, for “adequacy decisions and adequacy
regulations” substitute “transfers approved by regulations”.
(8) In paragraph 10 (law enforcement processing: adequacy decisions and
adequacy regulations)—
(a) in sub-paragraph (1), for “based on adequacy regulations” substitute
25
“to be treated as approved by regulations made under section
74AA”,
(b) in sub-paragraph (4)(a), for “lists or other” substitute “schemes, lists
or other arrangements or”, and
(c) omit sub-paragraph (6).
(9)
30
In paragraph 12 (Part 3 (law enforcement processing): application of certain
provisions referring to regulations made under section 74A)—
(a) the existing text becomes sub-paragraph (1),
(b) in that sub-paragraph—
(i) for the words before paragraph (a) substitute “In sections
74B and 76(A1)—”, and
(ii) in paragraph (a), for “74A” substitute “74AA”, and 35
(c) after that sub-paragraph insert—
“(2) In its application to transfers treated as approved by virtue
of paragraph 10, section 74B(7) (transfers approved by
40
regulations: monitoring) has effect as if the reference to
section 74AA(4)(b) were omitted.”
Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill 163
Schedule 7—Transfers of personal data to third countries etc: consequential and transitional provision
Part 1—Consequential provision 
PART 2
TRANSITIONAL PROVISION
The UK GDPR: transfers approved by regulations
23
5
Regulations made under section 17A of the 2018 Act (transfers based on
adequacy regulations) and in force immediately before the relevant day
(1)
are to be treated, on and after that day, as if made under Article 45A of
the UK GDPR (inserted by Schedule 5 to this Act).
(2) In this paragraph, “the relevant day” means the day on which paragraph
4 of Schedule 5 to this Act comes into force.
The UK GDPR: transfers subject to appropriate safeguards 10
24 For the purposes of Article 44A(1)(a) and (2)(b) of the UK GDPR (general
principles for transfers of personal data), a transfer of personal data to a
(1)
third country or an international organisation made on or after the relevant
day is made subject to appropriate safeguards where—
(a) the transfer is made under arrangements entered into before the 15
relevant day,
(b) safeguards are provided in accordance with paragraph 2 or 3 of
Article 46 of the UK GDPR or paragraph 9 of Schedule 21 to the
2018 Act, and
(c) if the transfer had been made immediately before the relevant day, 20
it would have satisfied—
(i) the condition in Article 46(1) of the UK GDPR relating to
data subjects’ rights and legal remedies, and
(ii)
25
the requirements of the last sentence of Article 44 of the UK
GDPR (level of protection must not be undermined).
(2) Sub-paragraph (1) has effect in addition to Article 46(1A) of the UK GDPR.
(3) In this paragraph—
“international organisation” has the same meaning as in the 2018 Act
(see section 205 of that Act);
“personal data” has the same meaning as in the 2018 Act (see section 30
3 of that Act);
“the relevant day” means the day on which paragraph 6 of Schedule
5 to this Act comes into force;
35
“third country” has the same meaning as in Part 3 of the 2018 Act (see
section 33 of that Act).
The UK GDPR: transfers subject to appropriate safeguards provided by standard data
protection clauses
25 Regulations made under section 17C of the 2018 Act (standard data
protection clauses) and in force immediately before the relevant day are to
(1)
164 Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill
Schedule 7—Transfers of personal data to third countries etc: consequential and transitional provision
Part 2—Transitional provision 
be treated, on and after that day, as if made under Article 47A(1) of the
UK GDPR (inserted by Schedule 5 to this Act).
(2) In this paragraph, “the relevant day” means the day on which paragraph
8 of Schedule 5 to this Act comes into force.
26 This paragraph applies to a requirement for safeguards to be provided 5
under—
(1)
(a) Article 46(1A)(a)(i) of the UK GDPR, or
(b) paragraph 24(1)(b) of this Schedule.
(2)
10
The requirement may be satisfied on and after the relevant day by a version
of pre-commencement standard clauses incorporating changes where—
(a) all of the changes are made in consequence of the amendment of
Chapter 5 of the UK GDPR by this Act, and
(b) none of the changes alters the effect of the clauses.
(3)
15
Changing a reference to regulations under section 17A of the 2018 Act into
a reference to regulations made under Article 45A of the UK GDPR is to
be treated as a change falling within sub-paragraph (2).
(4) Sub-paragraphs (2) and (3) cease to apply in relation to pre-commencement
standard clauses if—
(a)
20
the clauses are specified in regulations and a provision of the
regulations relating to the clauses is amended or revoked on or after
the relevant day, or
(b) the clauses are specified in another document and a provision of
the document relating to the clauses is amended or withdrawn by
the Information Commissioner on or after the relevant day.
(5) Sub-paragraph (2) has effect in addition to Article 46(2) and (3) of the UK 25
GDPR.
(6) In this paragraph—
“pre-commencement standard clauses” means standard data protection
clauses specified in—
(a) regulations made under section 17C of the 2018 Act and in 30
force immediately before the relevant day, or
(b) a document issued by the Information Commissioner under
section 119A of the 2018 Act before the relevant day and not
withdrawn before that day;
“the relevant day” means the day on which paragraph 6 of Schedule 35
5 to this Act comes into force.
The UK GDPR: transfers necessary for important reasons of public interest
27 Regulations made under section 18(1) of the 2018 Act (transfers necessary
40
for important reasons of public interest) and in force immediately before
(1)
the relevant day are to be treated, on and after that day, as if made under
Article 49(4A) of the UK GDPR (inserted by Schedule 5 to this Act).
Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill 165
Schedule 7—Transfers of personal data to third countries etc: consequential and transitional provision
Part 2—Transitional provision 
(2) In this paragraph, “the relevant day” means the day on which paragraph
9(5) of Schedule 5 to this Act comes into force.
The UK GDPR: restrictions on transfers of personal data to third countries and international
organisations
28 Regulations made under section 18(2) of the 2018 Act (restrictions on 5
transfers of personal data to third countries and international organisations)
(1)
and in force immediately before the relevant day are to be treated, on and
after that day, as if made under Article 49A of the UK GDPR (inserted by
Schedule 5 to this Act).
(2) In this paragraph, “the relevant day” means the day on which paragraph 10
10 of Schedule 5 to this Act comes into force.
Part 3 of the 2018 Act (law enforcement processing): transfers approved by regulations
29 Regulations made under section 74A of the 2018 Act (transfers based on
15
adequacy regulations) and in force immediately before the relevant day
(1)
are to be treated, on and after that day, as if made under section 74AA of
that Act (inserted by Schedule 6 to this Act).
(2) In this paragraph, “the relevant day” means the day on which paragraph
4 of Schedule 6 to this Act comes into force.
Part 3 of the 2018 Act (law enforcement processing): transfers subject to appropriate safeguards
30 For the purposes of section 73(3) of the 2018 Act (general principles for 20
transfers of personal data), a transfer of personal data to a third country
(1)
or an international organisation made on or after the relevant day is a
transfer made subject to appropriate safeguards where—
(a)
25
an appropriate pre-commencement legal instrument binds the
intended recipient of the data, and
(b) if the transfer had been made immediately before the relevant day,
it would have been a transfer based on there being appropriate
safeguards by virtue of that instrument and section 75(1)(a) of the
2018 Act.
(2) Sub-paragraph (1) has effect in addition to section 75(1A) of the 2018 Act. 30
(3) For the purposes of sub-paragraph (1), a legal instrument is an “appropriate
pre-commencement legal instrument”, in relation to a transfer of personal
data, if—
(a) it was entered into before the relevant day,
(b) it is intended to be relied on in connection with the transfer or that 35
type of transfer, and
(c) at least one competent authority is a party to the instrument.
(4) In this paragraph—
166 Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill
Schedule 7—Transfers of personal data to third countries etc: consequential and transitional provision
Part 2—Transitional provision 
“competent authority” has the same meaning as in Part 3 of the 2018
Act (see section 30 of that Act);
“international organisation” has the same meaning as in the 2018 Act
(see section 205 of that Act);
“personal data” has the same meaning as in the 2018 Act (see section 5
3 of that Act);
“the relevant day” means the day on which paragraph 6 of Schedule
6 to this Act comes into force;
10
“third country” has the same meaning as in Part 3 of the 2018 Act (see
section 33 of that Act).
SCHEDULE 8 Section 41
COMPLAINTS: MINOR AND CONSEQUENTIAL AMENDMENTS
The UK GDPR
1 The UK GDPR is amended as follows.
2 In Article 12(4) (transparent information, communication and modalities 15
for the exercise of the rights of the data subject), for “lodging a complaint
with the Commissioner” substitute “making a complaint to the controller
under section 164A of the 2018 Act, making a complaint to the
Commissioner under section 165 of that Act”.
3 Article 13(2) (information to be provided where personal data are collected 20
from the data subject) is amended as follows.
(1)
(2) After point (c) insert—
“(ca) the right to make a complaint to the controller under section
164A of the 2018 Act;”.
(3) In point (d), for “lodge a complaint with the Commissioner” substitute 25
“make a complaint to the Commissioner under section 165 of the 2018 Act”.
4 Article 14(2) (information to be provided where personal data have not
been obtained from the data subject) is amended as follows.
(1)
(2) After point (d) insert—
“(da) the right to make a complaint to the controller (see section 30
164A of the 2018 Act);”.
(3) In point (e), for “lodge a complaint with the Commissioner” substitute
“make a complaint to the Commissioner under section 165 of the 2018 Act”.
5 (1) Article 15(1) (right of access by the data subject) is amended as follows.
Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill 167
Schedule 8—Complaints: minor and consequential amendments 
(2) After point (e) insert—
“(ea) the right to make a complaint to the controller under section
164A of the 2018 Act;”.
(3)
5
In point (f), for “lodge a complaint with the Commissioner” substitute
“make a complaint to the Commissioner under section 165 of the 2018 Act”.
6 In Article 47 (binding corporate rules), in paragraph 2(e), for “lodge a
complaint with the Commissioner and” substitute “make a complaint to
the controller under section 164A of the 2018 Act, the right to make a
10
complaint to the Commissioner under section 165 of the 2018 Act, the right
to lodge a complaint”.
7 In Article 57 (Information Commissioner’s tasks)—
(a) in paragraph 1, omit point (f), and
(b) omit paragraph 2.
8 Omit Article 77 (right to lodge a complaint with the Commissioner).
9 (1) Article 80 (representation of data subjects) is amended as follows. 15
(2) In paragraph 1—
(a) for “lodge the complaint” substitute “make a complaint under section
164A or 165 of the 2018 Act”, and
(b) omit “77,”.
(3) In paragraph 2, for “lodge a complaint with the Commissioner” substitute 20
“make a complaint under section 164A or 165 of the 2018 Act”.
The 2018 Act
10 The 2018 Act is amended as follows.
11
25
In section 26(2)(f) (national security and defence exemption), omit
sub-paragraph (zi) (inserted by section 24 of this Act).
12 (1) Section 44 (information: controller’s general duties) is amended as follows.
(2) In subsection (1)—
(a) after paragraph (d) insert—
“(da)
30
the existence of the right to make a complaint to the
controller (see section 164A);”, and
(b) in paragraph (e), after “Commissioner”, in the first place it occurs,
insert “(see section 165)”.
(3) In subsection (5)—
(a) after paragraph (c) insert—
“(ca) of the data subject’s right to make a complaint to the 35
controller under section 164A,”, and
(b) in paragraph (d), after “Commissioner” insert “under section 165”.
13 (1) Section 45 (right of access by the data subject) is amended as follows.
168 Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill
Schedule 8—Complaints: minor and consequential amendments 
(2) In subsection (2)—
(a) after paragraph (e) insert—
“(ea) the existence of the data subject’s right to make a
complaint to the controller (see section 164A);”, and
(b) in paragraph (f), after “the Commissioner”, in the first place it occurs, 5
insert “(see section 165)”.
(3) In subsection (5)—
(a) after paragraph (c) insert—
“(ca)
10
of the data subject’s right to make a complaint to the
controller under section 164A,”, and
(b) in paragraph (d), at the end insert “under section 165”.
14 In section 45A (exemption from sections 44 and 45: legal professional
privilege) (inserted by section 10 of this Act), in subsection (2), after
paragraph (c) insert—
“(ca) the data subject’s right to make a complaint to the controller 15
under section 164A,”.
15 Section 48 (rights to rectification, to erasure or to restriction of processing:
supplementary) is amended as follows.
(1)
(2) In subsection (1)(b)—
(a) after sub-paragraph (ii) insert— 20
“(iia) of the data subject’s right to make a complaint
to the controller under section 164A,”, and
(b) in sub-paragraph (iii), after “Commissioner” insert “under section
165”.
(3) In subsection (4)— 25
(a) after paragraph (b) insert—
“(ba) of the data subject’s right to make a complaint to the
controller under section 164A,”, and
(b) in paragraph (c), after “Commissioner” insert “under section 165”.
16 In section 93(1)(e) (right to information), after “Commissioner”, in the first 30
place it occurs, insert “under section 165”.
17 In section 94(2)(f) (right of access), after “Commissioner”, in the first place
it occurs, insert “under section 165”.
18
35
In section 135 (manifestly unfounded or excessive requests by data subjects),
after subsection (5) (inserted by section 32 of this Act), insert—
“(6) In this section, “request” does not include a complaint under section
165.”
19 (1) Section 149 (enforcement notices) is amended as follows.
Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill 169
Schedule 8—Complaints: minor and consequential amendments 
(2) In subsection (1), for “or (5)” substitute “, (5) or (5A)”.
(3) After subsection (5) insert—
“(5A) The fifth type of failure is where a controller has failed, or is failing,
5
to comply with section 164A or with regulations under section
164B.”
(4) In subsection (6), for “or (5)” substitute “, (5) or (5A)”.
20 In section 155 (penalty notices), in subsection (1)(a), for “or (5)” substitute
“, (5) or (5A)”.
21 In section 157 (maximum amount of penalty), after subsection (4) insert—
“(4A) In relation to an infringement of section 164A or of regulations 10
under section 164B, the maximum amount of the penalty that may
be imposed by a penalty notice is the standard maximum amount.”
22 In section 165 (complaints by data subjects), in the heading, at the end
insert “to the Commissioner”.
23 (1) Section 166 (orders to progress complaints) is amended as follows. 15
(2) In the heading, at the end insert “to the Commissioner”.
(3) In subsection (1), omit “or Article 77 of the UK GDPR”.
24 Section 187 (representation of data subjects with their authority) is amended
as follows.
(1)
(2) In subsection (1)(a)— 20
(a) for “Articles 77,” substitute “sections 164A and 165 (complaints) and
Articles”, and
(b) omit “to lodge complaints and”.
(3) In subsection (2)—
(a) before paragraph (a) insert— 25
“(za) the right under section 164A (complaints to the
controller);”, and
(b) in paragraph (a), for “165(2) and (4)(d)” substitute “165”.
25
30
Section 204A (vexatious or excessive) (inserted by section 7 of this Act) is
amended as follows.
(1)
(2) After subsection (1) insert—
“(1A) For the purposes of this Act, whether a complaint to the
Commissioner is vexatious or excessive must be determined having
35
regard to the circumstances of the complaint, including (so far as
relevant)—
(a) the nature of the complaint,
(b) the complainant’s relationship with the person who is the
subject of the complaint (“the subject”) and the
Commissioner,
170 Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill
Schedule 8—Complaints: minor and consequential amendments 
(c) the resources available to the Commissioner,
(d) the extent to which the complaint repeats a previous
complaint made by the complainant to the subject or the
Commissioner,
(e) how long ago any previous complaint was made, and 5
(f) whether the complaint overlaps with other complaints made
by the complainant to the subject or the Commissioner.”
(3) In subsection (2), after “requests”, in both places it occurs, insert “and
complaints”.
SCHEDULE 9 Section 45 10
DATA PROTECTION: MINOR AMENDMENTS
The UK GDPR
1 The UK GDPR is amended as follows.
2 (1) Article 4(1) (interpretation) is amended as follows.
(2) After point (A3) insert— 15
“(A4) “the data protection legislation” has the same meaning
as in the 2018 Act (see section 3(9) of that Act);”.
(3) After point (15) insert—
“(15A)
20
“direct marketing” means the communication (by
whatever means) of advertising or marketing material
which is directed to particular individuals;”.
(4) After point (28) insert—
“(29) “enactment” has the same meaning as in the 2018 Act
(see section 205 of that Act);
(30) “tribunal” means any tribunal in which legal proceedings 25
may be brought.”
3 In Article 9 (processing of special categories of personal data)—
(a) in paragraph 2, after “apply if” insert “the processing is based on
Article 6(1) and”,
(b) in paragraph 2(f), after “courts” insert “or tribunals”, and 30
(c) in paragraph 3, for the words from the beginning to “data are”
substitute “Paragraph 1 is only disapplied by point (h) of paragraph
2 if the personal data is”.
4
35
In Article 12(5) (information etc to be provided free of charge), at the
beginning insert “Subject to Article 15(3),”.
5 In Article 23(1)(h) (restrictions), for “(a)” substitute “(c)”.
Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill 171
Schedule 9—Data protection: minor amendments 
6 In Article 24(3) (responsibility of the controller), for “an element by which
to demonstrate” substitute “a means of demonstrating”.
7 In Article 25(3) (data protection by design and by default), for “an element
to demonstrate” substitute “a means of demonstrating”.
8 In Article 28(5) (processors), for “an element by which to demonstrate” 5
substitute “a means of demonstrating”.
9 In Article 32(3) (security of processing), for “an element by which to
demonstrate” substitute “a means of demonstrating”.
10 In Article 37(1)(a), after “courts” insert “and tribunals”.
11 Omit Article 59 (activity reports). 10
The 2018 Act
12 The 2018 Act is amended as follows.
13 In section 3(9) (definition of “the data protection legislation”)—
(a) insert “and” at the end of paragraph (c), and
(b) omit paragraph (e) (regulations under section 2(2) of the European 15
Communities Act 1972 which relate to the EU GDPR or the Law
Enforcement Directive) and the “and” immediately before it.
14 Omit section 20 (meaning of “court” in Part 2).
15
20
In section 119A(11) (standard clauses for transfers to third countries etc),
after “any” insert “whole days that fall within a”.
16 In section 124(5) (data protection and journalism code), in the definition of
“good practice in the processing of personal data for the purposes of
journalism”—
(a)
25
in paragraph (a), omit “, including compliance with the requirements
of the data protection legislation”, and
(b) after paragraph (b) insert—
“and includes compliance with the requirements of the data
protection legislation;”.
17
30
In section 125(8) (approval of codes prepared by the Commissioner), after
“any” insert “whole days that fall within a”.
18 In section 139 (reporting to Parliament), omit subsection (2).
19 In section 161(6) (approval of first guidance about regulatory action), after
“any” insert “whole days that fall within a”.
20
35
In section 184(4) (prohibition of requirement to produce relevant records),
after “prevention” insert “, investigation”.
21 In section 192(6) (approval of the Framework), after “any” insert “whole
days that fall within a”.
172 Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill
Schedule 9—Data protection: minor amendments 
22 Schedule 1 (special categories of personal data and criminal convictions etc
data) is amended as follows.
(1)
(2) In the heading before paragraph 10, for “or detecting” substitute “etc”.
(3)
5
In paragraph 10(1)(a) (preventing etc unlawful acts), after “prevention”
insert “, investigation”.
(4) In paragraph 13(1)(a) (journalism etc in connection with unlawful acts and
dishonesty etc), after “consists of” insert “, or is carried out in preparation
for,”.
(5)
10
In paragraph 14(1)(b) (preventing fraud), after sub-paragraph (ii) (but before
the “or” at the end of that sub-paragraph) insert—
“(iia) the processing of personal data carried out in
preparation for disclosure described in sub-paragraph
(i) or (ii),”.
(6)
15
In paragraph 24(1)(a) (disclosure to elected representatives), after “consists
of” insert “, or is carried out in preparation for,”.
23 (1) Schedule 2 (exemptions etc from the UK GDPR) is amended as follows.
(2) In paragraph 2(1)(a) (crime), after “prevention” insert “, investigation”.
(3) In paragraph 3(2)(b)(ii) (crime: risk assessment systems), after “prevention”
insert “, investigation”.
24 In paragraph 8(1)(b) of Schedule 8 (conditions for sensitive processing 20
under Part 3: preventing fraud), after sub-paragraph (ii) (but before the
“or” at the end of that sub-paragraph) insert—
“(iia) the processing of personal data carried out in
25
preparation for disclosure described in sub-paragraph
(i) or (ii),”.
25 In paragraph 2(a) of Schedule 11 (other exemptions under Part 4: crime),
after “prevention” insert “, investigation”.
SCHEDULE 10 Section 86
PRIVACY AND ELECTRONIC COMMUNICATIONS: COMMISSIONER’S ENFORCEMENT POWERS
“SCHEDULE 1 Regulation 31 30
INFORMATION COMMISSIONER’S ENFORCEMENT POWERS
Provisions applied for enforcement purposes
1 For the purposes of enforcing these Regulations, the following provisions
35
of Parts 5 to 7 of the Data Protection Act 2018 apply with the modifications
set out in paragraphs 2 to 30—
Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill 173
Schedule 10—Privacy and electronic communications: Commissioner’s enforcement powers 
section 140 (publication by the Commissioner);
section 141 (notices from the Commissioner);
section 142 (information notices);
section 143 (information notices: restrictions);
section 144 (false statements made in response to an information 5
notice);
section 145 (information orders);
section 146 (assessment notices);
10
section 146A (assessment notices: approval of person to prepare
report);
section 147 (assessment notices: restrictions);
section 148 (destroying or falsifying information and documents
etc);
section 148A (interview notices);
section 148B (interview notices: restrictions); 15
section 148C (false statements made in response to interview notices);
section 149 (enforcement notices);
section 150 (enforcement notices: supplementary);
section 152 (enforcement notices: restrictions);
section 153 (enforcement notices: cancellation and variation); 20
section 154 and Schedule 15 (powers of entry and inspection);
section 155 and Schedule 16 (penalty notices);
section 156 (penalty notices: restrictions);
section 157 (maximum amount of penalty);
section 159 (amount of penalties: supplementary); 25
section 160 (guidance about regulatory action);
section 161 (approval of first guidance about regulatory action);
section 162 (rights of appeal);
section 163 (determination of appeals);
section 164 (applications in respect of urgent notices); 30
section 180 (jurisdiction);
section 181 (interpretation of Part 6);
section 182 (regulations and consultation);
section 196 (penalties for offences);
section 197(1) and (2) (prosecution); 35
section 198 (liability of directors etc);
section 200 (guidance about PACE codes of practice);
section 202 (proceedings in the First-tier Tribunal: contempt);
section 203 (Tribunal Procedure Rules).
General modification of references to the Data Protection Act 2018 40
2 The provisions listed in paragraph 1 have effect as if—
174 Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill
Schedule 10—Privacy and electronic communications: Commissioner’s enforcement powers 
(a) references to the Data Protection Act 2018 or to a Part of that Act
were references to the provisions of that Act or that Part as applied
by these Regulations;
(b)
5
references to a particular provision of that Act were references to
that provision as applied by these Regulations.
Modification of section 142 (information notices)
3 Section 142 has effect as if—
(a) in subsection (1), for paragraphs (a) and (b) there were substituted—
“(a)
10
require any person to provide the Commissioner with
information or documents that the Commissioner
reasonably requires for the purposes of determining
whether that person has complied or is complying
with the requirements of the PEC Regulations,
(b)
15
require a communications provider to provide the
Commissioner with information or documents relating
to another person’s use of an electronic
communications network or electronic
communications service for the purposes of
20
determining whether that other person has complied
or is complying with the requirements of the PEC
Regulations, or
(c) require any person to provide the Commissioner with
information or documents that the Commissioner
25
reasonably requires for the purposes of investigating
a suspected failure by another person to comply with
the requirements of the PEC Regulations.”;
(b) in subsection (2)(a), for “(b)(i) or (b)(ii)” there were substituted “(b)
or (c)”;
(c) after subsection (8) there were inserted—
“(8A) Subsections (8B) and (8C) apply if an information notice 30
given to a person under subsection (1)(b) or (c) contains—
(a) a statement that a duty of confidentiality applies in
relation to the notice, and
(b)
35
an explanation of the effects of subsections (8B) and
(8C).
(8B) The person to whom the information notice is given, and
any person employed or engaged for the purpose of that
person’s business, must not disclose the existence of the
notice without reasonable excuse.
(8C) Subsection (8B) does not prevent— 40
Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill 175
Schedule 10—Privacy and electronic communications: Commissioner’s enforcement powers 
(a) a disclosure to a person employed or engaged for
the purpose of the business of the person to whom
the notice is given,
(b)
5
a disclosure made with the permission of the
Commissioner (whether the permission is contained
in the information notice or otherwise), or
(c) a disclosure made for the purpose of obtaining legal
advice.”;
(d) subsection (10) were omitted.
Modification of section 143 (information notices: restrictions) 10
4 (1) Section 143 has effect as if subsection (1) were omitted.
(2) In that section—
(a) subsections (3)(b) and (4)(b) have effect as if for “the data protection
legislation” there were substituted “the PEC Regulations”;
(b) subsection (7)(a) has effect as if for “this Act” there were substituted 15
“section 144, 148 or 148C or paragraph 15 of Schedule 15”;
(c) subsection (8) has effect as if for “this Act (other than an offence
under section 144)” there were substituted “section 148 or 148C or
paragraph 15 of Schedule 15”.
Modification of section 145 (information orders) 20
5 Section 145(2)(b) has effect as if for “section 142(2)(b)” there were substituted
“section 142(2)”.
Modification of section 146 (assessment notices)
6 Section 146 has effect as if—
(a) in subsection (1)— 25
(i) for “a controller or processor” there were substituted “a
person within subsection (1A)”;
(ii) for “the controller or processor” there were substituted “the
person”;
(iii) for “the data protection legislation” there were substituted 30
“the requirements of the PEC Regulations”;
(b) after subsection (1) there were inserted—
“(1A) A person is within this subsection if the person—
(a) is a communications provider, or
(b) is engaged in any activity regulated by the PEC 35
Regulations.”;
(c) in subsection (2)—
(i) for “controller or processor” there were substituted “person
to whom it is given”;
176 Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill
Schedule 10—Privacy and electronic communications: Commissioner’s enforcement powers 
(ii) in paragraph (h), for “the processing of personal data” there
were substituted “any activity regulated by the PEC
Regulations”;
(iii)
5
in paragraph (i), for “process personal data on behalf of the
controller” there were substituted “are involved in any such
activity on behalf of the person to whom the notice is given”;
(d) in subsection (3A), for “controller or processor” there were
substituted “person”;
(e)
10
in subsection (7), for “controller or processor” there were substituted
“person to whom the notice is given”;
(f) in subsection (8)—
(i) in paragraph (a), for “controller or processor” there were
substituted “person to whom the notice is given”;
(ii)
15
in the words after paragraph (c), for “controller or processor”
there were substituted “person”;
(g) in subsection (9)—
(i) in paragraph (a), for the words from “a controller” to “this
Act” there were substituted “the person to whom the notice
20
is given has failed or is failing to comply with the
requirements of the PEC Regulations or that an offence under
section 144, 148 or 148C or paragraph 15 of Schedule 15”;
(ii) in paragraph (d), for “controller or processor” there were
substituted “person”;
(h)
25
in subsection (10), for “controller or processor” there were substituted
“person”;
(i) subsection (11) were omitted;
(j) in subsection (11A)—
(i) for “controller or processor”, in the first place it occurs, there
were substituted “person to whom it is given”;
(ii) for “controller or processor”, in the second place it occurs, 30
there were substituted “the person”.
Modification of section 146A (assessment notices: approval of person to prepare report)
7 Section 146A has effect as if—
(a)
35
in subsection (1), for “a controller or processor” there were
substituted “a person (“P”)”;
(b) in subsection (2), for “The controller or processor” there were
substituted “P”;
(c) in subsections (3) to (6), for “the controller or processor” (in each
place) there were substituted “P”.
Modification of section 147 (assessment notices: restrictions) 40
8 (1) Section 147 has effect as if subsections (5) and (6)(b) were omitted.
Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill 177
Schedule 10—Privacy and electronic communications: Commissioner’s enforcement powers 
(2) In that section, subsections (2)(b) and (3)(b) have effect as if for “the data
protection legislation” there were substituted “the PEC Regulations”.
Modification of section 148A (interview notices)
9 (1) Section 148A has effect as if—
(a) in subsection (1)— 5
(i) for “a controller or processor” there were substituted “a
person”;
(ii) in paragraph (a), for “as described in section 149(2)” there
10
were substituted “to comply with a requirement of the PEC
Regulations”;
(iii) in paragraph (b), for “this Act” there were substituted
“section 144, 148 or 148C or paragraph 15 of Schedule 15”;
(b) in subsection (3)—
(i)
15
in paragraph (a), for “the controller or processor” there were
substituted “the person mentioned in subsection (1)”;
(ii) in paragraph (b), for “the controller or processor” there were
substituted “that person”;
(iii) in paragraph (c), for “the controller or processor” there were
substituted “that person”.
Modification of section 148B (interview notices: restrictions) 20
10 (1) Section 148B has effect as if subsections (8) and (9) were omitted.
(2) In that section—
(a) subsections (2)(b) and (3)(b) have effect as if for “the data protection
legislation” there were substituted “the PEC Regulations”;
(b) subsection (6)(a) has effect as if for “this Act” there were substituted 25
“section 144, 148 or 148C or paragraph 15 of Schedule 15”;
(c) subsection (7) has effect as if for “this Act (other than an offence
under section 148C)” there were substituted “section 144 or 148 or
paragraph 15 of Schedule 15”.
Modification of section 149 (enforcement notices) 30
11 Section 149 has effect as if subsections (2) to (5A) and (7) to (9) were
omitted.
(1)
(2) In that section—
(a) subsection (1) has effect as if—
(i) for “as described in subsections (2), (3), (4), (5) or (5A)” there 35
were substituted “to comply with a requirement of the PEC
Regulations”;
(ii) for “sections 150 and 151” there were substituted “section
150”;
178 Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill
Schedule 10—Privacy and electronic communications: Commissioner’s enforcement powers 
(b) subsection (6) has effect as if the words “given in reliance on
subsection (2), (3), (5) or (5A)” were omitted.
Modification of section 150 (enforcement notices: supplementary)
12 (1) Section 150 has effect as if subsection (3) were omitted.
(2) In that section, subsection (2) has effect as if the words “in reliance on 5
section 149(2)” were omitted.
Modification of section 152 (enforcement notices: restrictions)
13 Section 152 has effect as if subsections (1), (2) and (4) were omitted.
Modification of Schedule 15 (powers of entry and inspection)
14 (1) Schedule 15 has effect as if paragraph 3 were omitted. 10
(2) Paragraph 1(1) of that Schedule (issue of warrants in connection with
non-compliance and offences) has effect as if for paragraph (a) (but not the
final “and”) there were substituted—
“(a) there are reasonable grounds for suspecting that—
(i) a person has failed or is failing to comply with a 15
requirement of the PEC Regulations, or
(ii) an offence under section 144, 148, or 148C or
paragraph 15 of this Schedule has been or is being
committed,”.
(3) Paragraph 2 of that Schedule (issue of warrants in connection with 20
assessment notices) has effect as if—
(a) in sub-paragraphs (1) and (2), for “controller or processor” there
were substituted “person”;
(b)
25
in sub-paragraph (2), for “the data protection legislation” there were
substituted “the PEC Regulations”.
(4) Paragraph 5 of that Schedule (content of warrants) has effect as if—
(a) in sub-paragraph (1)(c), for “the processing of personal data” there
were substituted “an activity regulated by the PEC Regulations”;
(b)
30
in sub-paragraph (2)(d), for the words from “controller or processor”
to the end there were substituted “person mentioned in paragraph
1(1)(a) has failed or is failing to comply with a requirement of the
PEC Regulations”;
(c) in sub-paragraph (3)(a) and (d)—
(i)
35
for “controller or processor” there were substituted “person
mentioned in paragraph 2(1)”;
(ii) for “the data protection legislation” there were substituted
“the requirements of the PEC Regulations”.
Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill 179
Schedule 10—Privacy and electronic communications: Commissioner’s enforcement powers 
(5) Paragraph 11 of that Schedule (privileged communications) has effect as
if, in sub-paragraphs (1)(b) and (2)(b), for “the data protection legislation”
there were substituted “the PEC Regulations”.
Modification of section 155 (penalty notices)
15 Section 155 has effect as if— 5
(a) in subsection (1)—
(i) in paragraph (a), for “as described in section 149(2), (3), (4),
(5) or (5A)” there were substituted “to comply with a
requirement of the PEC Regulations”;
(ii) after paragraph (c), there were inserted “or 10
(d) has failed to comply with the prohibition in section
142(8B),”;
(b) after subsection (1) there were inserted—
“(1A)
15
But the Commissioner may not give a penalty notice to a
person in respect of a failure to comply with regulation 5A
or 26A of the PEC Regulations.”;
(c) for subsection (2) there were substituted—
“(2) When deciding whether to give a penalty notice to a person
20
and determining the amount of the penalty, the Commission
must have regard to the matters listed in subsection (3), so
far as relevant.”;
(d) in subsection (3)—
(i) for “the controller or processor” (in each place) there were
substituted “the person”;
(ii) in paragraph (c), for “data subjects” there were substituted 25
“subscribers or users”;
(iii) in paragraph (d), for the words “in accordance with section
57, 66, 103 or 107” there were substituted “with a view to
30
securing compliance with the requirements of the PEC
Regulations”;
(iv) paragraph (g) were omitted;
(v) in paragraph (j), the words “or certification mechanism” were
omitted;
(e) subsection (4) were omitted;
(f) after subsection (4) there were inserted— 35
“(4A) If a penalty notice is given to a body in respect of a failure
to comply with any of regulations 19 to 24 of the PEC
Regulations, the Commissioner may also give a penalty notice
40
to an officer of the body if the Commissioner is satisfied that
the failure—
(a) took place with the consent or connivance of the
officer, or
180 Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill
Schedule 10—Privacy and electronic communications: Commissioner’s enforcement powers 
(b) was attributable to any neglect on the part of the
officer.
(4B) In subsection (4A)—
5
“body” means a body corporate or a Scottish
partnership;
“officer”, in relation to a body, means—
(a) in relation to a body corporate—
(i) a director, manager, secretary or other
10
similar officer of the body or any
person purporting to act in such
capacity, and
(ii) where the affairs of the body are
managed by its members, a member;
or
(b) in relation to a Scottish partnership, a partner 15
or any person purporting to act as a partner.”;
(g) subsections (6) to (8) were omitted.
Modification of Schedule 16 (penalties)
16 Schedule 16 has effect as if paragraphs 3(2)(b) and 5(2)(b) were omitted.
Modification of section 156 20
17 (1) Section 156 has effect as if subsections (1), (2), (4)(b) and (5) were omitted.
(2) In that section, subsection (3) has effect as if for the words from “controller”
to “determined by or” there were substituted “penalty notice to a person
who acts”.
Modification of section 157 (maximum amount of penalty) 25
18 Section 157 has effect as if—
(a) subsection (1) were omitted;
(b) in subsection (2)—
(i)
30
for “Part 3 of this Act” there were substituted “the PEC
Regulations”;
(ii) in paragraph (a), for the words from “section 35” to “or 78”
there were substituted “regulation 5, 6, 7, 8, 14, 19, 20, 21,
21A, 21B, 22, 23 or 24”;
(c) subsections (3) and (4A) were omitted;
(d) after subsection (4A) there were inserted— 35
“(4B) In relation to an infringement of section 142(8B) of this Act,
the maximum amount of the penalty that may be imposed
by a penalty notice is the higher maximum amount.”
Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill 181
Schedule 10—Privacy and electronic communications: Commissioner’s enforcement powers 
Modification of section 159 (amount of penalties: supplementary)
19 Section 159 has effect as if—
(a) in subsection (1), the words “Article 83 of the UK GDPR and” were
omitted;
(b) in subsection (2), the words “Article 83 of the UK GDPR,” and “and 5
section 158” were omitted.
Modification of section 160 (guidance)
20 Section 160 has effect as if, in subsection (4)(f), for “controllers and
processors” there were substituted “persons”.
Modification of section 162 (rights of appeal) 10
21 Section 162 has effect as if subsection (4) were omitted.
Modification of section 163 (determination of appeals)
22 Section 163 has effect as if subsection (6) were omitted.
Modification of section 180 (jurisdiction)
23 Section 180 has effect as if subsections (2)(b), (c), (d) and (e) and (3) were 15
omitted.
(1)
(2) Subsection (1) of that section has effect as if for “subsections (3) and (4)”
there were substituted “subsection (4)”.
Modification of section 181 (interpretation of Part 6)
24 Section 181 has effect as if the definition of “certification provider” were 20
omitted.
Modification of section 182 (regulations and consultation)
25 Section 182 has effect as if subsections (3), (4), (6), (8) to (12) and (14) were
omitted.
26 Subsection (13) of that section has effect as if for “provision comes into 25
force” there were substituted “coming into force of section 86 of the Data
Protection and Digital Information Act 2023”.
Modification of section 196 (penalties for offences)
27 (1) Section 196 has effect as if subsections (3) to (5) were omitted.
(2) In that section— 30
(a) subsection (1) has effect as if the words “section 119 or 173 or” were
omitted;
182 Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill
Schedule 10—Privacy and electronic communications: Commissioner’s enforcement powers 
(b) subsection (2) has effect as if for “section 132, 144, 148, 148C, 170,
171 or 184” there were substituted “section 144, 148 or 148C”.
Modification of section 200 (guidance about PACE codes of practice)
28
5
Section 200 has effect as if, in subsection (1), for “this Act” there were
substituted “section 144, 148 and 148C and paragraph 15 of Schedule”.
Modification of section 202 (proceedings in the First-tier Tribunal: contempt)
29 Section 202 has effect as if, in subsection (1)(a), for sub-paragraphs (i) and
(ii) there were substituted “on an appeal under section 162”.
Modification of section 203 (tribunal procedure rules)
30 Section 203 has effect as if— 10
(a) in subsection (1), for paragraphs (a) and (b) there were substituted
“the exercise of the rights of appeal conferred by section 162”;
(b) in subsection (2)—
(i)
15
in paragraph (a), for “the processing of personal data” there
were substituted “any activity regulated by the PEC
Regulations”;
(ii) in paragraph (b), for “the processing of personal data” there
were substituted “any such activity”.
Interpretation
31 In this Schedule, “the PEC Regulations” means these Regulations.” 20
SCHEDULE 11 Section 98
REGISTERS OF BIRTHS AND DEATHS: MINOR AND CONSEQUENTIAL AMENDMENTS
PART 1
AMENDMENTS OF THE BIRTHS AND DEATHS REGISTRATION ACT 1953
1 The Births and Deaths Registration Act 1953 is amended as follows. 25
2 Section 3A (registration of births of abandoned children) is amended as
follows.
(1)
(2) In subsection (5), for the words from “direct” to the end substitute “enter
30
in the margin of the relevant register of births a reference to the
re-registration of the birth or, if the relevant register of births is in hard
copy form, shall direct the officer having custody of that register to do so.”
Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill 183
Schedule 11—Registers of births and deaths: minor and consequential amendments
Part 1—Amendments of the Births and Deaths Registration Act 1953 
(3) After that subsection insert—
“(6) In subsection (5) “the relevant register of births”, in relation to the
re-registration of the birth of a child, means the register of births
in which the entry relating to the child was previously made.”
3 Section 13 (registration of name of child or of alteration of name) is amended 5
as follows.
(1)
(2) In subsection (1), for “the registrar or superintendent registrar having the
custody of the register” substitute “the relevant registration officer for the
register”.
(3) In subsection (1A), for “The registrar or superintendent registrar having 10
custody of the register in question” substitute “The relevant registration
officer”.
(4) In subsection (1B), for “the registrar or superintendent registrar” substitute
“the relevant registration officer”.
(5) After subsection (2) insert— 15
“(2A) In this section the “relevant registration officer” for a register
means—
(a) the registrar of births and deaths for the sub-district for
which the register is or has been kept, or
(b) the superintendent registrar for the district containing that 20
sub-district.”
4 In Part 3 (general), the italic heading before section 25 becomes “Registers,
etc”.
5 (1) Section 29 (correction of errors in registers) is amended as follows.
(2) In subsection (3), for “the officer having the custody of the register” 25
substitute “the appropriate registration officer”.
(3) In subsection (3A)(b), for “the officer having the custody of the register”
substitute “the appropriate registration officer”.
(4)
30
In subsection (3B)(b), for “the officer having the custody of the register”
substitute “the appropriate registration officer”.
(5) In subsection (4), for “the officer having the custody of the register”
substitute “the appropriate registration officer for the register”.
(6) After subsection (4) insert—
“(5)
35
In this section the “appropriate registration officer”, in relation to
a register, means—
(a) in the case of a register of live-births or of deaths in hard
copy form, the superintendent registrar having custody of
the register;
(b)
40
in the case of a register of live-births or of deaths not in hard
copy form—
184 Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill
Schedule 11—Registers of births and deaths: minor and consequential amendments
Part 1—Amendments of the Births and Deaths Registration Act 1953 
(i) the registrar of births and deaths for the sub-district
for which the register is or has been kept, or
(ii) the superintendent registrar for the district containing
that sub-district;
(c) in the case of a register of still-births, the Registrar General.” 5
6 In section 29A (alternative procedure for certain corrections), in subsection
(4)—
(a) for “the officer having custody of the register” substitute “the
appropriate registration officer”;
(b) at the end insert— 10
““Appropriate registration officer” has the same meaning as in
section 29 of this Act.”
7 Section 30 (searches of indexes kept by Registrar General) is amended as
follows.
(1)
(2) After subsection (1) insert— 15
“(1ZA) The Registrar General shall cause the following indexes to be made
and kept in the General Register Office—
(a) an index of the entries in the registers kept under section 1
of this Act;
(b) an index of the entries in the registers kept under section 15 20
of this Act.”
(3) In subsection (2), after “certified copies” insert “or in the said registers (as
the case may be)”.
(4) In subsection (3)—
(a) for “to certified copies of entries in” substitute “in relation to”; 25
(b) for the words from “any such” to the end substitute “any register
of still-births”.
8 In section 31 (searches of indexes kept by superintendent registrars), for
subsection (1) substitute—
“(1) The superintendent registrar for each district shall cause the 30
following indexes to be made—
(a) an index of the entries in the registers of live-births kept for
the sub-districts within that district;
(b)
35
an index of the entries in the registers of deaths kept for the
sub-districts within that district.
(1A) The indexes must be kept with the other records of the register
office for the district.”
Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill 185
Schedule 11—Registers of births and deaths: minor and consequential amendments
Part 1—Amendments of the Births and Deaths Registration Act 1953 
9 For section 32 (searches in registers kept by registrars) substitute—
“32 Obtaining copies of entries from registrars
(1) Any person is entitled to obtain from a registrar for a sub-district,
5
at any time when the registrar’s office is required to be open for
the transaction of public business, a copy certified by the registrar
of any entry in any register of births or register of deaths kept for
that sub-district.
(2) But subsection (1) does not apply in relation to any register of
10
still-births except as the registrar may, with the consent of the
Registrar General, in any particular case allow.”
10 (1) Section 33 (short certificate of birth) is amended as follows.
(2) In subsection (1), for “the Registrar General, a superintendent registrar or
a registrar” substitute “the appropriate registration officer”.
(3) After subsection (1) insert—
“(1A) In subsection (1) the “appropriate registration officer” means— 15
(a) in the case of a live-birth, the Registrar General, a
superintendent registrar or a registrar;
(b) in the case of a still-birth—
(i) the Registrar General, or
(ii) a registrar acting at the time of the registration of the 20
still-birth or with the consent of the Registrar
General.”
(4) In subsection (2)—
(a)
25
for the words from “the records and registers” to “may be” substitute
“the register in which the entry relating to the birth is made, or, in
the case of the Registrar General, from the records in the Registrar
General’s custody”;
(b) for “any such records or registers” substitute “any register of births
or in any such records”.
11 In section 33A (short certificate of death), in subsection (2), for the words 30
from “the records and registers” to “may be” substitute “the register in
which the entry relating to the death is made, or, in the case of the Registrar
General, from the records in the Registrar General’s custody”.
12
35
In section 34 (entry in register as evidence of birth or death), in subsection
(5), before “on which” insert “in or”.
13 Section 34A (searches and records of information: additional provision) is
amended as follows.
(1)
(2) In subsection (1)—
186 Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill
Schedule 11—Registers of births and deaths: minor and consequential amendments
Part 1—Amendments of the Births and Deaths Registration Act 1953 
(a) after paragraph (a) insert—
“(aa) to carry out, on request, a search to find out whether
any of the registers kept under this Act contains a
particular entry;”;
(b) in paragraph (b), after “copies” insert “or in such a register”. 5
(3) In subsection (5), at the end insert “or in a register kept under this Act”.
14 In section 35 (offences relating to registers), in paragraph (b), after “deaths”
insert “kept in hard copy form”.
15
10
In section 40 (sending and providing notices, information or other
documents), omit “, return”.
16 In section 41 (interpretation), after subsection (3) insert—
“(4) For the purposes of this Act a register is in hard copy form if it
consists of a paper copy or similar form capable of being read with
the naked eye.”
PART 2 15
AMENDMENTS OF OTHER LEGISLATION
Registration Service Act 1953
17 The Registration Service Act 1953 is amended as follows.
18
20
In section 10 (district register offices), in subsection (1), omit the words
from “, and shall provide” to the end.
19 In section 12 (provision of register boxes), omit “registrar of births and
deaths and”.
20 In section 13 (local schemes of organisation), in subsection (2), after
paragraph (b) insert—
“(ba) determining the equipment or facilities to be provided at 25
those offices and stations by the council for the
non-metropolitan county or metropolitan district;”.
Public Records Act 1958
21
30
In Schedule 1 to the Public Records Act 1958 (definition of public records),
in paragraph 2(2)(b), after “adoptions,” insert “or to any other records held
by the Registrar General of information entered in any register of births or
deaths kept under any such enactment,”.
Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill 187
Schedule 11—Registers of births and deaths: minor and consequential amendments
Part 2—Amendments of other legislation 
Social Security Administration Act 1992
22 In section 124 of the Social Security Administration Act 1992 (provisions
relating to age, death and marriage), after subsection (5) insert—
“(6)
5
The reference in subsection (1) above to a register in the custody of
a registrar or superintendent registrar includes, in relation to
registers of births or deaths kept under the Births and Deaths
Registration Act 1953, a reference to any such register kept for the
registrar’s sub-district or (as the case may be) for a sub-district
10
within the superintendent registrar’s district; and references in
subsection (3) above to the custodian of the register are to be read
accordingly.”
Education Act 1996
23 Section 564 of the Education Act 1996 (certificates of birth and registrars’
returns) is amended as follows.
(1)
(2) In subsection (1), for “the registrar having the custody of the register of 15
births and deaths” substitute “the relevant registrar for the register”.
(3) In subsection (3)—
(a) for “A registrar” substitute “The relevant registrar for a register”;
(b)
20
for “any register of births and deaths in his custody” substitute “the
register”.
(4) In subsection (4)—
(a) in the definition of “the appropriate fee”, for “the registrar having
custody of the register concerned” substitute “the relevant registrar
for a register”;
(b) for the definition of “register of births and deaths” substitute— 25
““register” means a register of births or register of deaths kept
under that Act,”;
(c) at the end insert—
““the relevant registrar” for a register means—
(a) in the case of a register in hard copy form (within 30
the meaning of the Births and Deaths Registration
Act 1953), the superintendent registrar having custody
of the register;
(b)
35
in the case of a register not in hard copy form (within
the meaning of that Act)—
(i) the registrar of births and deaths for the
sub-district for which the register is or has
been kept, or
(ii)
40
the superintendent registrar for the district
containing that sub-district.”
188 Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill
Schedule 11—Registers of births and deaths: minor and consequential amendments
Part 2—Amendments of other legislation 
Adoption and Children Act 2002
24 In section 78 of the Adoption and Children Act 2002 (Adopted Children
Register: searches and copies), in subsection (4)—
(a) in paragraph (a), omit “certified copies of”;
(b) in paragraph (b), for “certified copies” (in the second place it occurs) 5
substitute “registers”.
Gender Recognition Act 2004
25 The Gender Recognition Act 2004 is amended as follows.
26 (1) Section 10 (registration) is amended as follows.
(2) In subsection (2), omit the “or” after paragraph (a) and after paragraph (b) 10
insert “, or
(c) an entry in a register kept under section 1 of the Births and
Deaths Registration Act 1953,”.
(3) For subsection (3) substitute—
“(3) “The appropriate Registrar General” means— 15
(a) in relation to a UK birth register entry of which a certified
copy is kept by a Registrar General or which is in a register
so kept, whichever Registrar General keeps that certified
copy or that register;
(b) in relation to a UK birth register entry in a register kept 20
under section 1 of the Births and Deaths Registration Act
1953, the Registrar General for England and Wales.
(3A) For the purposes of this section each of the following is a Registrar
General—
(a) the Registrar General for England and Wales; 25
(b) the Registrar General for Scotland;
(c) the Registrar General for Northern Ireland.”
27 In Part 1 of Schedule 3 (registration: England and Wales), in paragraphs
5(3) and 8(2), for “or (b)” substitute “, (b) or (c)”.
Presumption of Death Act 2013 30
28 In Schedule 1 to the Presumption of Death Act 2013 (Register of Presumed
Deaths), in paragraph 7 (interpretation)—
(a) after “means” insert “—
(a)”;
(b) at the end insert “, or 35
(b) the index kept in the General Register Office of such
entries.”
Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill 189
Schedule 11—Registers of births and deaths: minor and consequential amendments
Part 2—Amendments of other legislation 
SCHEDULE 12 Section 99
INFORMATION STANDARDS FOR HEALTH AND ADULT SOCIAL CARE IN ENGLAND
1 Part 9 of the Health and Social Care Act 2012 (health and adult social care
services: information) is amended as follows.
2 Before section 250 insert— 5
“Powers to publish standards”.
3 Section 250 (powers to publish information standards) is amended as
follows.
(1)
(2)
10
In subsection (2), at the end insert “and includes, among other things, a
standard relating to information technology or IT services used, or intended
to be used, in connection with the processing of information (see section
250A)”.
(3) In subsection (2B)(c)—
(a) after “provision” insert “in, or in relation to, England”, and
(b) omit “in England”. 15
(4) In subsection (2B), at the end insert—
“(e) a relevant IT provider.”
(5) In subsection (3)—
(a) after “provision” insert “in, or in relation to, England”, and
(b) omit “in England”. 20
(6) In subsection (7)—
(a) in the opening words, for “section” substitute “Chapter”,
(b) after the definition of “health care” insert—
““information technology” includes—
(a) computers, 25
(b) other devices whose uses include the processing of
information by electronic means (“IT devices”),
(c) parts, accessories and other equipment made or
30
adapted for use in connection with computers or IT
devices,
(d) software and code made or adapted for use in
connection with computers or IT devices, and
(e) networks and other infrastructure (whether physical
35
or virtual) used in connection with other information
technology;
“IT service” means an information technology service, including
any service (whether physical or virtual) which consists of,
or is provided in connection with, the development, making
190 Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill
Schedule 12—Information standards for health and adult social care in England 
available, operation or maintenance of information
technology;”,
(c) in the definition of “processing”, omit “and (14)”, and
(d) at the end insert—
““relevant IT provider” means a person involved in marketing, 5
supplying, providing or otherwise making available—
(a) information technology,
(b) an IT service, or
(c)
10
a service which consists of processing information
using information technology,
whether for payment or free of charge, but only so far as
the technology or service is used, or intended to be used, in
connection with the provision in, or in relation to, England
of health care or of adult social care.”
4 After section 250 insert— 15
“250A Standards relating to information technology
(1) An information standard relating to information technology or IT
services may, among other things, make provision about—
(a)
20
the design, quality, capabilities or other characteristics of
such technology or services;
(b) contracts or other arrangements under which such technology
or services are marketed, supplied, provided or otherwise
made available.
(2)
25
An information standard may include technical provision about
information technology or IT services, including provision about—
(a) functionality;
(b) connectivity;
(c) interoperability;
(d) portability;
(e) storage of, and access to, information; 30
(f) security of information.
(3) An information standard may make provision by reference to open
standards or proprietary standards.”
5 (1) Section 251 (information standards: procedure etc) is amended as follows.
(2) In the heading omit “Information standards:”. 35
(3) For subsection (3) substitute—
“(3) The power under section 250(1) may be exercised by—
(a) adopting an information standard prepared or published by
40
another person, including as it has effect from time to time,
or
Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill 191
Schedule 12—Information standards for health and adult social care in England 
(b) making provision by reference to an international agreement
or another document, including as it has effect from time to
time.”
6 After section 251 insert—
“Compliance with standards”. 5
7 For the heading of section 251ZA (information standards: compliance)
substitute “Monitoring compliance”.
8 After that section insert—
“251ZB Notice requesting compliance by relevant IT providers
(1) If the Secretary of State has reasonable grounds to suspect that a 10
relevant IT provider is not complying with an information standard
which applies to the provider, the Secretary of State may give the
provider a written notice which—
(a) identifies the standard in question,
(b) sets out the Secretary of State’s grounds for suspecting that 15
the provider is not complying with the standard,
(c) asks the provider to comply with the standard within a
period specified in the notice,
(d)
20
asks the provider, within a period specified in the notice, to
provide evidence to the Secretary of State’s satisfaction that
the provider is complying with the standard, and
(e) if the Secretary of State considers it appropriate, sets out the
steps that the Secretary of State considers the provider must
25
take, within a period specified in the notice, in order to
comply with the standard.
(2) A period specified for the purposes of subsection (1)(c), (d) or (e)
must be a period of at least 28 days beginning with the day on
which the notice is given.
(3)
30
The Secretary of State may, by giving the relevant IT provider a
further written notice, vary or revoke a notice given under subsection
(1).
251ZC Public censure of relevant IT providers
(1) If the Secretary of State has reasonable grounds to suspect that a
35
relevant IT provider is not complying with an information standard
which applies to the provider, the Secretary of State may publish a
statement to that effect.
(2) The statement may include the text of a notice given to the provider
under section 251ZB.
192 Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill
Schedule 12—Information standards for health and adult social care in England 
(3) Before publishing a statement under this section, the Secretary of
State must give the relevant IT provider—
(a) a copy of the terms of the proposed statement, and
(b)
5
an opportunity to make representations about the decision
to publish a statement and the terms of the statement.
(4) If, after considering any representations, the Secretary of State
decides to publish the statement, the Secretary of State must inform
the relevant IT provider before publishing it.
251ZD Exercise of functions of Secretary of State by other persons
(1) The Secretary of State may— 10
(a) direct a public body to exercise some or all of the functions
listed in subsection (3), and
(b) give the public body directions about the exercise of those
15
functions, including directions about the processing of
information that the body obtains in exercising those
functions.
(2) The Secretary of State may make arrangements for a person
prescribed by regulations under this subsection to exercise some or
all of the functions listed in subsection (3).
(3) Those functions are— 20
(a) the Secretary of State’s functions under section 251ZA, so
far as they relate to relevant IT providers, and
(b) the Secretary of State’s functions under section 251ZB.
(4) Arrangements under subsection (2) may—
(a) provide for the Secretary of State to make payments to the 25
person, and
(b) make provision as to the circumstances in which such
payments are to be repaid to the Secretary of State.
(5)
30
Section 304(9) applies in relation to the power to make arrangements
under subsection (2) as it applies to a power of the Secretary of
State to give directions under this Act.
Accreditation
251ZE Accreditation of information technology etc
(1)
35
Regulations may make provision for the establishment and operation
of a scheme for the accreditation of information technology and IT
services so far as used, or intended to be used, in connection with
the provision in, or in relation to, England of health care or of adult
social care.
Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill 193
Schedule 12—Information standards for health and adult social care in England 
(2) The regulations may provide for the scheme to be established and
operated by a person specified in the regulations (“the operator”).
(3) The regulations may, among other things, confer power on the
operator—
(a) to establish the procedure for accreditation under the scheme, 5
(b) to set the criteria for accreditation under the scheme (“the
accreditation criteria”),
(c) to keep an accreditation under the scheme under review,
and
(d) to charge a reasonable fee in respect of an application for 10
accreditation.
(4) The regulations may, among other things, make provision requiring
the operator—
(a)
15
to set some or all of the accreditation criteria by reference
to information standards,
(b) to publish details of the scheme, including the accreditation
criteria,
(c) to provide for the review of a decision to refuse an
application for accreditation, and
(d) to provide advice to applicants for accreditation with a view 20
to ensuring that the accreditation criteria are met.”
SCHEDULE 13 Section 100
THE INFORMATION COMMISSION
Schedule 12A to the 2018 Act
1 In the 2018 Act, after Schedule 12 insert— 25
“SCHEDULE 12A Section 114A
THE INFORMATION COMMISSION
Status
1 (1) The Commission is not to be regarded—
(a) as a servant or agent of the Crown, or 30
(b) as enjoying any status, immunity or privilege of the
Crown.
(2) The Commission’s property is not to be regarded—
(a) as property of the Crown, or
(b) as property held on behalf of the Crown. 35
194 Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill
Schedule 13—The Information Commission 
Number of members
2 The number of members of the Commission is to be determined
by the Secretary of State.
(1)
(2) That number must not be—
(a) less than 3, or 5
(b) more than 14.
(3) The Secretary of State may by regulations substitute a different
number for the number for the time being specified in
sub-paragraph (2)(b).
(4) Regulations under this paragraph are subject to the negative 10
resolution procedure.
Membership: general
3 (1) The Commission is to consist of—
(a) the non-executive members, and
(b) the executive members. 15
(2) The non-executive members are—
(a) a chair appointed by His Majesty by Letters Patent on the
recommendation of the Secretary of State, and
(b) such other members as the Secretary of State may appoint.
(3) The executive members are— 20
(a) a chief executive appointed by the non-executive members,
and
(b) such other members, if any, as the non-executive members
may appoint.
(4) The non-executive members must consult the Secretary of State 25
before appointing the chief executive.
(5) The non-executive members must consult the chief executive
about whether there should be any executive members within
sub-paragraph (3)(b) and, if so, how many there should be.
(6) The Secretary of State may by direction set a maximum and a 30
minimum number of executive members.
(7) The Commission may appoint one of the non-executive members
as a deputy to the chair.
Membership: non-executive members to outnumber executive members
4 The Secretary of State must exercise the powers conferred on the 35
Secretary of State by paragraphs 2 and 3 so as to secure that the
number of non-executive members of the Commission is, so far
Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill 195
Schedule 13—The Information Commission 
as practicable, at all times greater than the number of executive
members.
Membership: selection on merit etc
5
5
The Secretary of State may not recommend a person for
appointment as the chair of the Commission unless the person
(1)
has been selected on merit on the basis of fair and open
competition.
(2) A person may not be appointed as a member of the Commission
10
unless the person has been selected on merit on the basis of fair
and open competition.
Membership: conflicts of interests
6 (1) Before—
(a) recommending a person for appointment as the chair of
the Commission, or
(b) appointing a person as a non-executive member of the 15
Commission,
the Secretary of State must be satisfied that the person does not
have a conflict of interest.
(2)
20
The Secretary of State must check from time to time that none of
the non-executive members has a conflict of interest.
(3) The Secretary of State may require a non-executive member to
provide whatever information the Secretary of State considers
necessary for the purpose of checking that the member does not
have a conflict of interest.
(4) A non-executive member who is required to provide information 25
under sub-paragraph (3) must provide it within such period as
may be specified by the Secretary of State.
(5) In this Schedule, “conflict of interest”, in relation to a person,
30
means a financial or other interest which is likely to affect
prejudicially the discharge by the person of the person’s functions
as a member of the Commission.
Tenure of the chair
7 The chair of the Commission holds and vacates office in
35
accordance with the terms of the chair’s appointment, subject to
the provisions of this paragraph.
(1)
(2) The chair must be appointed for a term of not more than 7 years.
(3) On the recommendation of the Secretary of State, His Majesty
may by Letters Patent extend the term of the chair’s appointment
but not so the term as extended is more than 7 years.
196 Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill
Schedule 13—The Information Commission 
(4) A person cannot be appointed as the chair more than once.
(5) The chair may be relieved from office by His Majesty at the chair’s
own request.
(6)
5
The chair may be removed from office by His Majesty on an
Address from both Houses of Parliament.
(7) No motion is to be made in either House of Parliament for such
an Address unless the Secretary of State has presented a report
to that House stating that the Secretary of State is satisfied that—
(a) the chair is guilty of serious misconduct,
(b) the chair has a conflict of interest (see paragraph 6(5)), 10
(c) the chair has failed to comply with paragraph 6(4), or
(d) the chair is unable, unfit or unwilling to carry out the
chair’s functions.
Tenure of deputy chair
8 A deputy chair of the Commission may resign that office by 15
giving written notice to the Commission.
(1)
(2) A deputy chair of the Commission ceases to hold that office on
ceasing to be a non-executive member of the Commission.
(3)
20
A deputy chair of the Commission may be removed from that
office by the Commission.
Tenure of the other non-executive members
9 This paragraph applies to a non-executive member of the
Commission appointed by the Secretary of State.
(1)
(2)
25
The member holds and vacates office in accordance with the
terms of their appointment, subject to the provisions of this
paragraph.
(3) The member must be appointed for a term of not more than 7
years.
(4)
30
The Secretary of State may extend the term of the member’s
appointment but not so that the term as extended is more than
7 years.
(5) The Secretary of State may not appoint the member as a
non-executive member of the Commission on a subsequent
occasion.
(6) The member may resign from office by giving written notice to 35
the Secretary of State and the Commission.
(7) The Secretary of State may remove the member from office by
written notice if satisfied that—
Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill 197
Schedule 13—The Information Commission 
(a) the member is guilty of serious misconduct,
(b) the member has a conflict of interest (see paragraph 6(5)),
(c) the member has failed to comply with paragraph 6(4), or
(d)
5
the member is unable, unfit or unwilling to carry out the
member’s functions.
(8) At the time of removing the member from office the Secretary of
State must make public the decision to do so.
(9) The Secretary of State must—
(a)
10
give the member a statement of reasons for the removal,
and
(b) if asked to do so by the member, publish the statement.
Remuneration and pensions of non-executive members
10 The Commission may pay to the non-executive members of the
15
Commission such remuneration and allowances as the Secretary
of State may determine.
(1)
(2) The Commission may pay, or make provision for paying, to or
in respect of the non-executive members of the Commission, such
sums by way of pensions, allowances or gratuities (including
20
pensions, allowances or gratuities paid by way of compensation
in respect of loss of office) as the Secretary of State may determine.
(3) The Commission may make a payment to a person of such
amount as the Secretary of State may determine where—
(a) the person ceases to be a non-executive member of the
25
Commission otherwise than on the expiry of the person’s
term of office, and
(b) it appears to the Secretary of State that there are special
circumstances which make it appropriate for the person
to receive compensation.
Executive members: terms and conditions
11 The executive members of the Commission are to be employees 30
of the Commission.
(1)
(2) The executive members are to be employed by the Commission
on such terms and conditions, including those as to remuneration,
as the non-executive members of the Commission may determine.
(3) The Commission must— 35
(a) pay to or in respect of the executive members of the
Commission such pensions, allowances or gratuities
(including pensions, allowances or gratuities paid by way
of compensation in respect of loss of office) as the
198 Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill
Schedule 13—The Information Commission 
non-executive members of the Commission may determine,
and
(b) provide and maintain for them such pension schemes
5
(whether contributory or not) as the non-executive
members of the Commission may determine.
Other staff: appointment, terms and conditions
12 (1) The Commission may—
(a) appoint other employees, and
(b)
10
make such other arrangements for the staffing of the
Commission as it considers appropriate.
(2) In appointing an employee, the Commission must have regard
to the principle of selection on merit on the basis of fair and open
competition.
(3)
15
Employees appointed by the Commission are to be appointed on
such terms and conditions, including those as to remuneration,
as the Commission may determine.
(4) The Commission may—
(a) pay to or in respect of those employees such pensions,
20
allowances or gratuities (including pensions, allowances
or gratuities paid by way of compensation in respect of
loss of employment) as the Commission may determine,
and
(b) provide and maintain for them such pension schemes
25
(whether contributory or not) as the Commission may
determine.
Committees
13 (1) The Commission may establish committees.
(2) A committee of the Commission may consist of or include persons
who are neither members nor employees of the Commission.
(3) But a committee of the Commission to which functions are 30
delegated under paragraph 14(1)(c) must include at least one
person who is either a member or an employee of the
Commission.
(4)
35
Where a person who is neither a member nor an employee of the
Commission is a member of a committee of the Commission, the
Commission may pay to that person such remuneration and
expenses as it may determine.
Delegation of functions
14 (1) The Commission may delegate any of its functions to—
Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill 199
Schedule 13—The Information Commission 
(a) a member of the Commission,
(b) an employee of the Commission, or
(c) a committee of the Commission.
(2)
5
A function is delegated under sub-paragraph (1) to the extent
and on the terms that the Commission determines.
(3) A committee of the Commission may delegate any function
delegated to it to a member of the committee.
(4) A function is delegated under sub-paragraph (3) to the extent
and on the terms that the committee determines.
(5) The power of a committee of the Commission to delegate a 10
function, and to determine the extent and terms of the delegation,
is subject to the Commission’s power to direct what a committee
established by it may and may not do.
(6)
15
The delegation of a function by the Commission or a committee
of the Commission under this paragraph does not prevent the
Commission or the committee from exercising that function.
Advice from committees
15 The Commission may require a committee of the Commission to
20
give the Commission advice about matters relating to the
discharge of the Commission’s functions.
Proceedings
16 (1) The Commission may make arrangements for regulating—
(a) its own procedure, and
(b) the procedure of a committee of the Commission.
(2) The non-executive members of the Commission may by majority 25
make arrangements for regulating the procedure for the carrying
out of the separate functions which are conferred on them under
this Schedule.
(3)
30
Arrangements under this paragraph may include arrangements
as to quorum and the making of decisions by a majority.
(4) The Commission must publish arrangements which it makes
under this paragraph.
(5) This paragraph is subject to paragraph 18.
Records of proceedings
17 The Commission must make arrangements for the keeping of 35
proper records of—
(a) its proceedings,
200 Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill
Schedule 13—The Information Commission 
(b) the proceedings of a committee of the Commission,
(c) the proceedings at a meeting of the non-executive members
of the Commission,
(d)
5
anything done by a member or employee of the
Commission under paragraph 14(1), and
(e) anything done by a member of a committee of the
Commission under paragraph 14(3).
Disqualification for acting in relation to certain matters
18 (1) This paragraph applies if—
(a) a member of the Commission has a direct or indirect 10
interest in a matter falling to be considered at a meeting
of the Commission,
(b) a non-executive member of the Commission has a direct
15
or indirect interest in a matter falling to be considered at
a meeting of the non-executive members, or
(c) a member of a committee of the Commission has a direct
or indirect interest in a matter falling to be considered at
a meeting of the committee.
(2) The member with the interest must declare it.
(3) The declaration must be recorded in the minutes of the meeting. 20
(4) The member with the interest may not take part in a discussion
or decision at the meeting relating to the matter, unless—
(a) in the case of a meeting of the Commission, the other
25
members of the Commission who are present have
resolved unanimously that the interest is to be disregarded,
(b) in the case of a meeting of the non-executive members,
the other non-executive members who are present have
so resolved, or
(c)
30
in the case of a meeting of a committee, the other members
of the committee who are present have so resolved in the
manner authorised by the Commission.
(5) In giving authorisation for the purposes of sub-paragraph (4)(c),
the Commission must secure that a resolution for those purposes
35
does not allow a member to take part in a discussion or decision
at a meeting of a committee to which functions are delegated
under paragraph 14(1)(c) unless the number of other members
of the committee in favour of the resolution—
(a) is not less than two thirds of those who are both present
and entitled to vote on the resolution, and
(b) is not less than its quorum. 40
(6) For the purposes of this paragraph, a notification given at or sent
to a meeting of the Commission that a person—
Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill 201
Schedule 13—The Information Commission 
(a) is a member of a company or firm, and
(b) is to be regarded as interested in any matter involving
that company or firm,
5
is to be regarded as compliance with sub-paragraph (2) in relation
to any such matter for the purposes of that meeting and
subsequent meetings of the Commission, of the non-executive
members or of a committee.
(7) For the purposes of this paragraph, a notification given at or sent
10
to a meeting of the non-executive members of the Commission
or of a committee of the Commission that—
(a) a person is a member of a company or firm, and
(b) is to be regarded as interested in any matter involving
that company or firm,
15
is to be regarded as compliance with sub-paragraph (2) in relation
to any such matter for the purposes of that meeting and
subsequent meetings of the non-executive members or (as the
case may be) of the committee.
(8) A notification described in sub-paragraph (6) or (7) remains in
force until it is withdrawn.
(9) A person required to make a declaration for the purposes of this 20
paragraph in relation to any meeting—
(a) is not required to attend the meeting, but
(b) is to be taken to have complied with the requirements of
25
this paragraph if the person takes reasonable steps to
secure that notice of the person’s interest is read out, and
taken into consideration, at the meeting in question.
Validity of proceedings
19 The validity of proceedings of the Commission, of the
30
non-executive members of the Commission or of a committee of
the Commission is not affected by—
(1)
(a) a vacancy in the membership of the Commission or of the
committee,
(b) a defect in the appointment of a member of the
Commission,
(c) a failure of the Secretary of State to comply with the 35
requirements of paragraph 4, or
(d) a failure to comply with arrangements under paragraph
16 or with a requirement under paragraph 18.
(2)
40
Nothing in sub-paragraph (1)(d) validates proceedings of a
meeting which is inquorate unless it is inquorate by reason only
of a matter within sub-paragraph (1)(b) or (c).
202 Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill
Schedule 13—The Information Commission 
Money
20 The Secretary of State may make payments to the Commission.
Fees etc and other sums
21
5
All fees, charges, penalties and other sums received by the
Commission in carrying out its functions are to be paid to the
Secretary of State.
(1)
(2) Sub-paragraph (1) does not apply where the Secretary of State
otherwise directs.
(3)
10
Any sums received by the Secretary of State under this paragraph
are to be paid into the Consolidated Fund.
Accounts
22 The Commission must keep proper accounts and proper records
in relation to them.
(1)
(2)
15
The Commission must prepare a statement of accounts in respect
of each financial year in the form specified by the Secretary of
State.
(3) The Commission must send a copy of each statement of accounts
to the Secretary of State and the Comptroller and Auditor General
20
before the end of August next following the financial year to
which the statement relates.
(4) The Comptroller and Auditor General must—
(a) examine, certify and report on the statement of accounts,
and
(b)
25
send a copy of the certified statement and the report to
the Secretary of State.
(5) The Secretary of State must lay before Parliament each document
received under sub-paragraph (4)(b).
(6) In this paragraph “financial year” means—
(a)
30
the period beginning with the date on which the
Commission is established and ending with the 31 March
following that date, and
(b) each successive period of 12 months.
Authentication of seal and presumption of authenticity of documents
23
35
The application of the Commission’s seal must be authenticated
by the signature of—
(1)
(a) the chair of the Commission, or
(b) another person authorised for that purpose by the
Commission.
Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill 203
Schedule 13—The Information Commission 
(2) A document purporting to be duly executed under the
Commission’s seal or signed on its behalf—
(a) is to be received in evidence, and
(b)
5
is to be taken to be executed or signed in that way, unless
the contrary is shown.
(3) This paragraph does not extend to Scotland.
Interpretation
24 In this Schedule—
(a)
10
references to pensions, allowances or gratuities include
references to any similar benefits provided on death or
retirement, and
(b) references to the payment of pensions, allowances or
gratuities to or in respect of a person include references
15
to the making of payments towards the provision of
pensions, allowances or gratuities to be paid to or in
respect of a person.”
Transitional provision
2 This paragraph applies to the person who holds the office of Information
20
Commissioner immediately before the day on which this Schedule comes
into force.
(1)
(2) The person is to be treated as having been appointed as the chair of the
Information Commission for a term that expires at the time the person
would cease to hold the office of Information Commissioner but for the
abolition of that office by section 101.
(3) The term for which the person is treated as having been appointed as the 25
chair of the Information Commission may not be extended under paragraph
7(3) of Schedule 12A to the 2018 Act so that the term as extended expires
after the end of the period of 7 years beginning with the day the person
began to hold the office of Information Commissioner.
204 Data Protection and Digital Information (No. 2) Bill
Schedule 13—The Information Commission 

